BEYOND
ACCESS
Women and queer persons with disabilities
expressing self and exploring sexuality online

-- 1 of 46 --

PAG E 2 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
Beyond access:
Women and queer persons with disabilities expressing self and exploring sexuality
online
Authors:
Shubha Kayastha, Mamata Pokharel
Peer Reviewer:
Sarita Lamichhane
Editor:
Shubha Kayastha
Contributors:
Srinidhi Raghavan, Tigist S. Hussen, hvale vale
Copy Editing, Graphic Design and Illustrations
Supriya Manandhar
Beyond access: Women and queer persons with disabilities expressing self and exploring
sexuality online
Published by Body & Data
2020
https://bodyanddata.org/

-- 2 of 46 --

PAG E 3 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
CONTENTS
Abbreviations 	4
Acknowledgments 	5
Executive Summary 6
Introduction 	8
Why this research? 	8
Our objectives 	10
Methodology and limitations of the study 	12
Feminist Ethical Principles of Research 	13
Operational definitions 	14
A spectrum of access 	16
Sexuality and bodies of PWD– a culture of silence 	20
Being seen as either asexual or hypersexual 	21
Changing times 	22
Discussing sexuality 	23
Safe spaces are starting points for robust discussions about disability and sexuality 24
Use of the internet for self-expression by persons with disabilities 	27
Self-censoring the online persona 	28
How disabled bodies are represented online 	30
How technology can facilitate expressions of sexuality 	31
A space to explore one’s many identities 	31
Lack of safe spaces online 35
Online violence experienced by women with disabilities 35
Life without the internet will be dull 	38
Recommendations for a dignified life online 	40
Recommendations for the government and its institutions 	40
Recommendations for the disability community 	41
Recommendations to technologists and developers 41
Recommendations to the wider community 	41
Recommendations to other movements 	42
Appendix 	43
FGD guiding questions 	43
Interview schedule 	44

-- 3 of 46 --

PAG E 4 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
ABBREVIATIONS
APC: Association of Progressive Communication
FGD: Focus Group Discussion
ICT: Internet and communication technologies
LGBTIQA+: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Queer, Intersex, Agender, Asexual
and Ally community
NDWA: Nepal Disabled Women Association
NGO: Non governmental organization
PWD: Persons with disabilities
SRH: Sexual and Reproductive Health
SRHR: Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights
UN CRPD: United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
WWD: Women with disabilities

-- 4 of 46 --

PAG E 5 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been put together with work and support of many individuals
and we would like to acknowledge everyone involved. Firstly, the participants of the
research who were part of the interviews and responded to the survey. Our thanks
goes to Kabita Raturi who coordinated various aspects of this research during the data
collection, and Mamata Pokharel for analysis and leading the writing process. We also
would like to thank Nepal Disabled Women Association (NDWA), Nepal Netrahin
Mahila Chhatrabas and disability activist Rama Dhakal for supporting us to access the
research participants.
Our acknowledgement also goes to Srinidhi Raghavan who helped in shaping the report
in its current form and for supporting in the analysis and the writing process, Dikshya
Khadgi for proofreading citations, and Supriya Manandhar for the editing, layout and the
beautiful illustrations.
From conception of the research idea to the writing process, we were also
supported by hvale vale and Tigist Shewarege Hussen from Association of Progressive
Communication (APC) and fellow partners from EROTICS second phase Point of View
in India, Ghosha and Women and Media Collective in Sri Lanka, and Parsa Sajid from
Bangladesh. We also would like to thank Amplify Change for the financial resources for
the research through APC.
Shubha Kayastha

-- 5 of 46 --

PAG E 6 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Women and queer people with disabilities face
layers of discrimination amidst the Brahminical
patriarchy, queerphobia and ableism pervasive in
Nepali society. These hinder women and queer
people with disabilities from freely exploring
and expressing their opinions, and accessing
information 	and 	services 	around 	sexuality.
These hurdles exist despite the presence of
various legal provisions for their rights.They are
subject to constant judgment and ridicule for
their choices and desires. People with disabilities
(PWD) are expected to behave, express and
present themselves based on the parameters
set by abled bodies for abled bodies themselves.
Under this framework, there are assumptions
about what the basic needs of PWDs are, a
view that generally excludes aspects of sex
and sexuality. Further, the dominant discourse
around PWDs looks at them as objects of
pity, needing support, and incapable of agency.
All this in turn erases their multiple realities
and narratives of resistance, and excludes the
intersectionality that these bodies carry.
In such a scenario, online spaces have been an
escape for women and queer individuals with
disabilities to explore and express themselves,
while evading some of the restrictions faced
offline through surveillance within the family
or outside. Facebook is the most common
platform 	used 	by 	the 	participants, 	with
Facebook messenger as the common mode
of communication. Women and queer persons
with disabilities use online spaces for work, to
learn skills, exchange greetings, or entertain
themselves. They 	also 	curate 	spaces 	where
they feel comfortable; spaces which they use
to express themselves through their opinions,
poems or photos; or spaces where they can
vent out. They share their sexual lives in small
groups of friends and co-workers.They also use
the internet to exchange and express sexual
pleasure with others and explore dating, even
though these activities could be restricted for
them offline.
The 	understanding 	of 	the 	word 	sexuality
(‘younikta’ 	in 	Nepal), 	is 	loaded 	with 	the
concept 	of 	decency 	and 	indecency, 	and
directly connotes sex. Thus sexual expression
is 	often 	misunderstood 	as 	sharing 	details
of one’s personal sexual life, when in reality
sexual expression encompasses a much wider
spectrum of activities. We saw this dichotomy
in the research participants’ understanding of
the term sexuality, in that only a few perceived
their activities as falling under the umbrella
of sexual or erotic expression. Yet many of
our participants reported sharing photos and
content from events and conferences related to
sexual and reproductive rights. They saw this as
solely part of their activism, boxed away from
personal expression. The research participants
also reported regularly using the internet for
information on beauty, sexuality and sexual
health. These examples showed that “sexuality”
and expressions of sexuality were understood
in a limited way.
Online spaces are also not devoid of challenges
and risks. Our study finds that hurdles to using
the internet for self expression include: lack of
access to devices and skills to navigate digital
technologies, expensive 	data 	costs, language
barriers, 	and 	insufficient 	disability-friendly
content, tools 	and 	applications. In 	addition,
participants 	stated 	that 	their 	internet 	use
was also restricted by socio-cultural factors,
including 	overprotection 	and 	monitoring 	of
online behavior by families and partners. Similarly,
participants also flagged lack of representation
in pornography and lack of accessible-format
pornography 	as 	shortcomings 	to 	exploring
sexuality.
The research participants consisted of activists
with disabilities who shared their understanding
of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ expressions; some their
own conception, some imposed. There was a
prevalence of internalized expectations such
as the need to always project a “motivational”
image for the disability community, and shaping

-- 6 of 46 --

PAG E 7 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
their own online behavior accordingly; these
expectations also limited free and spontaneous
expression. 	The 	only 	sexual 	expressions
accepted in general Nepali society are those
that 	fit 	into 	heteronormative 	social 	norms,
such 	as 	heterosexual 	marriage. The 	sexual
expression of women and queer people with
disabilities was discouraged offline, and this was
mirrored online as well. This policing occurred
not just from participants’ social circles but
also from within the disability rights movement
itself. Self-censorship of sexual expression was
prevalent, and this was to avoid being judged,
ridiculed, being labeled as hypersexual, or to
avoid unwanted sexual attention (referred to as
‘negative attention’ by the participants).
However, 	many 	participants 	affirmed 	that
conversations around sexuality of women and
queer persons with disability and acceptance
of their sexuality were important issues. There
was an assumption that talking about sexuality,
pleasure, and consent leads to social disapproval,
which in turn prevented consensual, mutually
beneficial exploration of pleasure. Even those
who indulged in internet content on sexual
pleasure avoided sharing it online out of fear of
losing credibility as activists.
Women 	and 	queer 	people 	with 	disabilities
face 	violence 	and 	harassment 	that 	is 	often
invasive. They are targeted for their identities
as 	women, 	as 	queer 	individuals, 	and 	as
persons 	with 	disabilities. 	The 	participants
reported facing harassment that ranged from
oversexualized comments to being solicited
for sex. Some of the violence took the form
of 	microaggressions, 	where 	persons 	with
disabilities were given backhanded compliments
expressing admiration for being beautiful or
successful despite disability, that they did not
“seem disabled”. Other aggressions manifested
as emotional labor, where women and queer
persons with disabilities were constantly asked
by abled persons to answer their questions and
satisfy their curiosities. Participants also found
that having a choice whether or not to reveal
their ability status was liberatory, allowing them
to explore other aspects of identity. Some even
used this choice in a strategic manner to tackle
unwanted attention.
Given the nuances of how women and queer
persons with disabilities are navigating digital
space to express themselves and explore their
sexuality, Body & Data has put together this
exploratory research ‘Beyond access: Women
and Queer Persons with Disabilities Expressing
Self 	and 	Exploring 	Sexuality 	Online’. 	The
research study was carried out among women
and queer people with disabilities through in-
depth interviews and Focus Group Discussions
(FGD) to understand their internet use for
sexual expression and self-expression.

-- 7 of 46 --

PAG E 8 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
INTRODUCTION
1 	Nepal. I., (2017). Exploring the use of the internet among gender equality and sexual rights
advocates in Nepal. EROTICS South Asia exploratory research: Sex, rights and the internet
2 	Preamble of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 2006
3 	The term “intersectionality” considers the intersections in our identities – both that are self-defined
and which further develop and evolve because of our interactions/experiences with others, and that which
are internalized as our own meanings but given, passed down, taught, told, reinforced, dictated by others
through political, social, economic and technological institutions.
4 	(2018, February 20). Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities reviews the report of
Nepal. OHCHR. https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=22676&LangID=E
5 	Morrison, J., Basnet, M., Budhathoki, B., Adhikari, D., Tumbahangphe, K., Manandhar, D., Groce, N.
(2014). Disabled women’s maternal and newborn health care in rural Nepal: A qualitative study. Midwifery,
30(11), 1132–1139. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.midw.2014.03.012
6 	Devkota, H. R., Murray, E., Kett, M., & Groce, N. (2017). Healthcare provider’s attitude towards
disability and experience of women with disabilities in the use of maternal healthcare service in rural
Nepal. Reproductive Health, 14, 79. http://doi.org/10.1186/s12978-017-0330-5
In Nepal, phase I of the EROTICS South Asia
report (2017) research looked at the myriad
ways in which online violence against women
mirrored offline gender relations.1 This research
explored the use of internet among gender
equality and sexual rights advocates in Nepal.
Second Phase of EROTICS South Asia is a
continuation of this research, focusing on the
experiences of a sample group of people who
have been limited to stereotypes in dominant
narratives in Nepal and across the globe.
When 	we 	began 	the 	quantitative 	research
we saw the need to include the experiences
of women with disabilities in Nepal. So with
our 	qualitative 	research, we 	explored 	how
women and 	queer persons with disabilities
used the internet as a platform to express
themselves sexually and to provide readers
with a deeper understanding of the challenges
and risks associated with their internet usage.
This research looks at the complex layers of
discrimination and marginalization that lead to
women with disabilities being ignored, often even
within their broader groups of marginalization
ie. women, queer, as well as disabled people.
Why this research?
The United Nations Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) defines
disability 	as “an 	evolving 	concept 	resulting
from the interaction between persons with
impairments and attitudinal and environmental
barriers that hinders their full and effective
participation in society on an equal basis with
others.”2 	In line with the Convention, Nepal’s
own Disability Rights Act of 2017 has made
significant departure from the welfare-based
approach 	to 	the 	rights-based 	approach 	to
disability, 	recognizing 	the 	intersectionalities3
within 	disability, and 	eliminating 	derogatory
narratives and even criminalizing the use of
such narratives. 4
Women and girls face structural and systemic
barriers 	to 	be 	able 	to 	fully 	enjoy 	their
reproductive 	health 	and rights and be 	safe
from any form of violence. The information and
services related to Sexual and Reproductive
Health 	(SRH) 	are 	either 	not 	accessible 	to
them, or 	their 	socio-cultural 	context 	does
not let them make use of existing facilities. 5&6
This gets more complicated for women with
disabilities. Women with disabilities in Nepal

-- 8 of 46 --

PAG E 9 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
face discrimination and are mistreated when
accessing these services. 7
Interviewee: 	Not 	much 	conversation
happens around bodies of PWDs. PWDs’
sexual life is in the shadows. Sexual life is
not their priority. For their parents, it’s not
their priority. For PWDs, the primary need
is something else. For instance, the access to
education, employment etc. Some of them
don’t even have basic support.That’s why.
Studies globally have shown that WWDs are
denied access to sexual and reproductive health
services at a much higher rate than their abled
counterparts. 8 In addition to this they face
very specific forms of violence related to their
disability.
The legal capacity of women with disabilities
is diluted in multiple legislations. Section 3 of
the Civil Code (Muluki Aparadh Ain) 2017 of
Nepal on Family laws, article 71.2 nullifies any
marriage if anyone is ‘fraudulently’ married to
someone who cannot speak or hear at all, is
blind, or is with severe intellectual disability.
No one shall conclude, or cause to be
concluded, 	marriage 	with 	a 	man 	or 	a
woman on any of the following conditions,
by way of misrepresentation: (a) One who
has contracted human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) or Hepatitis ‘B’ or similar other
incurable severe disease, (b) One who has
already been proved to have no sexual organ,
to be impotent or to have no reproductive
capability, (c) One who is dumb or has
lost hearing capacity, being fully blind or
is suffering from leprosy, (d) One who is
of unsound mind, (e) One who is already
a married, (f) One who is pregnant, (g)
One who has been convicted of a criminal
offense involving moral turpitude by a court
and sentenced for the same.
(3) 	A 	person 	who 	is 	aggrieved 	from
the conclusion of 	marriage by way of
7 	Kayastha, S. (2016). Sexuality of women with physical disabilities: Experience and realities [Masters
dissertation, Tribhuvan University]. Tribhuvan University Library.
8 	Mantsebo.T. (2018 September 26). Sexual and Reproductive Health Rights for Women with
Disabilities. Girl’s Globe. https://www.girlsglobe.org/2018/09/26/sexual-and-reproductive-health-and-rights-
for-women-with-disabilities/
9 	Women Enabled International. https://www.womenenabled.org/violence.html
misrepresentation pursuant to sub-section
(2) may get such a marriage voided and
claim 	a 	reasonable 	compensation 	from
the person who concludes, or causes to be
concluded, marriage by misrepresentation.
Given the existing power structure of our
society where women are marginalised, such a
law puts women with disability at risk. The law
has the potential to be misused by individuals
who may later claim that they were unaware of
the disability of their partner. Given the Nepali
judiciary’s record in prosecuting violence against
women, the law makes women with disabilities
vulnerable to malafide prosecution, even if they
and their partner had originally married with
consent. This goes against the Rights to Article
23 of UNCRPD that specifies PWDs right ‘to
marry and to found a family on the basis of
free and full consent of the intending spouses
is recognized’.
Section 6 of the Privacy Act 2018 on privacy
relating to reproductive health and pregnancy
considers 	matters 	relating 	to 	reproductive
health and pregnancy of all women private,
however such information could be shared with
the guardian or family if they are of ‘unsound
mind’. Language such as this restricts the rights
of PWDs to the ones “granted” to them by
their guardians/caregivers.This is tantamount to
having one’s privacy based on the diagnosis of
one’s mental state and thus does not respect
the 	autonomy 	of 	individuals 	to 	understand
their bodies and make decisions about it. It
also assumes family and guardians always make
decisions which are in the best interests of
PWDs, whereas studies have shown that there
is a high rate 9 of domestic violence and intimate
partner violence among women with disabilities
as well.While there are developments and small
positive steps in the legal landscape of Nepal,
women with disabilities remain highly under-
recognized, and many of the issues related to
disability are largely absent from the wider

-- 9 of 46 --

PAG E 1 0 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
discourse on social inclusion in Nepal.10 Besides
a 	few 	instances 	of 	inclusion 	issues 	around
needs and challenges of WWDs in the Sexual
and Reproductive Health and Rights (SRHR)
movement, other large movements in Nepal
also based on inequality and marginalization
like the indigenous movement, Dalit movement,
youth movement and LGBTIQA+ movements
have not incorporated the agendas of PWD
from within their own communities. Lack of
intersectionality in the discourse within each of
these movements limits spaces for WWDs to
bring forth and address multiple marginalizations
they might have.
This sentiment has been shared by a number of
individuals in the disability movement in Nepal.
During the SAWF Fund Convergence 2017
(South Asian Feminist event) indigenous rights
activist Chini Maya Majhi shared how women
are seen as a homogeneous group, without
accounting 	for 	the 	diversity 	within 	them.
According to Chini Maya, indigenous women
and 	women 	with 	disabilities 	(WWDs) 	still
find it difficult to integrate their issues within
the (mainstream) women’s movement as well
as in the indigenous movement and disability
movement respectively. 11
Similarly, Sarita 	Lamichhane 	in 	her 	article12
writes about how organizations that work for
young people are not inclusive of young people
with disabilities when it comes to providing
employment, or designing materials, websites
and spaces where they mobilise young people,
such as at demonstrations. She further writes,
people with disabilities are not seen as capable
advocates of any issue beside the issue of
disability itself. Even when they are included, it
is often mere tokenistic.
10 	Lord, A., Sijapati, B., Baniya, J., Chand, O., & Ghale, T. (2016). Disaster, Disability, & Difference: A
Study of the Challenges Faced by Persons with Disabilities in PostEarthquake Nepal. Published by Social
Science Baha and the United Nations Development Programme in Nepal: Kathmandu. https://ia801605.
us.archive.org/28/items/DisasterDisabilityDifferenceMay2016/Disaster-Disability-Difference_May-2016.pdf
11 	South Asian Women’s Fund (SAWF) Convergence 2017, Kathmandu, Nepal, Notes from the session
“Building Inclusive Movement”
12 	Lamichhane. S. (2020 August 15). Youth Day and Social Mentality(युवा दिवस र सामाजिक
मानजसकता). Saral Patrika https://saralpatrika.com/content/33817/2020-08-15?fbclid=IwAR074-
TrxwA3M4JK9jc6vfOzf2WNo1t3rKQp0-CGJ7rXkL4qmmHCFChqnxU#.XzdYhsL4qGY.facebook
13 	(Gurung 2010: ii)
Pratima 	Gurung, a 	feminist 	disability 	rights
activist, writes:
“Intersectional 	discrimination 	begins
first 	from 	the 	family 	itself 	for 	women
with 	disabilities 	(WWDs), 	pushing 	her
life towards deprivation, pessimism and
isolation. Slipping lower and lower in the
social hierarchy, they are most of the time
perceived as ‘unwanted and unproductive
human resources’ and are silenced. Having
no social security, lack of 	response from
the government, lack of 	identifying and
sensitizing 	on 	the 	rights 	and 	service
delivery for WwDs both in the private and
public sphere, WWDs are ‘excluded within
exclusion’.” 13
For 	women 	with 	disabilities, the 	exclusion
faced by a disabled body in an ableist world is
compounded by the exclusions faced by women
in a patriarchal world.
Our objectives
This study is a glimpse into the lives of women
activists with disabilities who are living with
multiple deprivations given Nepal’s structural
injustices. 	This 	report 	includes 	diverse
narratives of ways in which disability rights
advocates are using the internet, whether in
their personal lives, to explore and express
their sexualities, or for their activism. We aim
to shine a light on individuals who have been
ignored in mainstream discourses on women’s
rights movements, sexual rights movements,
and conversations around technology.
This research probes disability rights activists’
comfort with the language and concepts of
sexuality and sexual rights, their perceived needs

-- 10 of 46 --

PAG E 1 1 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
in the online space, online harassment of women
with disabilities, and areas where support is
needed. The primary objective is to sketch a
rough map of the landscape, and indicate any
major gaps and breaches that prevent women
with disabilities from exercising their freedom of
expression as citizens, or engaging in advocacy
work as activists online. Where possible, we
also focus on sexual expression of women with
disabilities and their advocacy work on sexuality,
including sexual and reproductive health rights.
The disability rights movement in Nepal was
initiated and is still led by mostly Brahmin
cisgender 	men, 	and 	women’s 	rights 	issues
within the disability movement is led mostly by
Brahmin cisgender women. The movement is
based on the principle of equality which focuses
on providing equal access and opportunities
and 	ensuring 	rights 	of 	PWDs. Though 	the
movement has also recognized special needs
and provisions required by the community, it
mostly revolves around what they consider
basic 	needs 	and 	requirements, keeping 	sex
and sexuality secondary. Within the disability
rights movement, a lot of emphasis is given to
employment opportunities and is thus linked
to education, revolving around the theory that
PWDs are made ‘abled’ to work professionally
despite 	their 	disabilities, 	and 	that 	financial
independence will help empower them.
Lately, women disability rights activists have
started flagging the need for focus on sexual
and reproductive health for the communities
of PWD, along with addressing and curbing
sexual violence they face. However, the way
in 	which 	sexual 	and 	reproductive 	health
concerns are raised in Nepal revolve around
heteronormative Brahminical ideas of marriage
and motherhood. A common refrain within
Nepal’s mainstream women’s rights movement
is a heavy focus on demand for protection from
violence, as opposed to other dimensions of
agency and autonomy. These ideas are carried
over into disability rights activism as well. There
is also a constant tendency to compare with
able 	bodies. The 	disability 	rights 	movement
14 	Banerjee.P. (2017 January 8). Disabled Women are not thought to be wife material by many. The
Hindustan Timeshttps://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/disabled-women-not-thought-to-be-wife-
material-by-many/story-QMqdQ4CSo43GQg5diavRGL.html
demands the same things able-bodies receive.
This is an “equality” focused lens, where the
rights being demanded are already limited to
begin with (rights formulated by and for abled
bodies), rather than seeking alternative forms of
defining ability for bodies of PWD, and exploring
what they are capable of on their own, beyond
comparison.
For 	women 	disability 	rights 	activists, these
conversations can be very complex; WWDs
are seen as unmarriageable or asexual, and thus
their fight for visibilising WWDs as worthy of
marriage is often the first step in actualising
their sexual rights, even though fixation on
“marriagability” restricts a broader concept of
women’s autonomy. 14
While 	our 	work 	was 	focused 	on 	sexual
expression of PWDs in the online space, our
conversations unearthed many other “basic”
needs 	that 	our 	discussants 	emphasized 	–
which points to a hierarchy of rights within the
disability movement.
PWD 	have 	multiple 	exclusions 	to 	fight,
whether it is inaccessible public services, lack
of education, lack of employment opportunities,
or 	discrimination 	within 	family 	and 	society.
Against this backdrop, sexuality and digital rights
are seen by many as a “luxury” or a secondary
problem. Our research also shows that there
is little to no work done in Nepal that focuses
on PWDs sexual expression or digital rights
in the country, let alone the intersections of
these two spaces – online sexual expression.
This is an indicator of how low these issues
are prioritized within the disability movement.
Technology is also often discussed in relation
to PWDs only in terms of access, considering
them as beneficiaries.
Body 	& 	Data 	emphasizes 	exploring 	issues
of 	digital 	rights 	from 	the 	perspective 	of
communities who are marginalized by the state
and social structure. Disability has been one of
the intersections we try to bring in wherever
we can, in terms of skills and knowledge we

-- 11 of 46 --

PAG E 1 2 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
have.While there is some understanding among
digital rights and tech groups that PWDs need
to have access to the internet, this also limits the
conversation to PWDs being end-users only. At
Body & Data, we seek to look into how ableist
views and perceptions of disability perpetuate
in 	any 	technologies 	or 	platforms. Learnings
from the disability justice movement inform our
analysis of national policies and our advocacy
work. We seek to take into account how the
community expresses themselves online and
how they are perceived, and discuss accessibility
not only in terms of gadgets and internet but
look into other barriers which prevent PWDs
from using them with autonomy. Body & Data
board member Sarita Lamichhane is a disability
rights activist who has been crucial in providing
suggestions for making our strategy and program
accessible and conducive to PWDs. Some of the
Body & Data staff also have previous experience
working with disability rights groups.
This research project is an important step for us
as an organization to understand the intersection
of disability, sexuality and technology further,
and integrate these findings into our ongoing
and future strategies.
Methodology and
limitations of the study
This report is built on individual narratives
and lived experiences of women activists with
disabilities.
A combination of 16 in-depth interviews and
two focus group discussions were held with
disability rights activists based in Kathmandu, all
of whom identified as women. The 16 in-depth
interviews that included 14 women disability
rights activists and 2 queer rights activists with
disability were important in bringing out rich
personal experiences of their encounters with
sexuality issues and digital spaces.
The interviews were complemented by two focus
group discussions which provided the larger
context in which the individual experiences
were taking place.The FGDs conducted had the
participation of 22 individuals (12 in one FGD
and 10 in the other). FGD is a useful method
in flattening the power dynamic between the
researcher and participants, and for encouraging
the group to talk about sensitive issues more
openly. The 	two 	FGDs 	were 	important 	in
providing clues to the issues that the WWD
activists saw as important, and also helped
the group get comfortable discussing issues
of sexuality with each other. This then helped
generate new ideas on how the work could be
taken forward as a community.
However, 	the 	combination 	of 	qualitative
methods we chose is not without limitations.
Focus group discussions, and to a lesser extent,
in-person 	interviews 	on 	these 	issues 	are
not anonymous, and tend to result in more
conservative responses on taboo issues such
as sexuality. As will be seen in the body of
this report, speaking openly about sexuality in
Nepal is taboo and many do not even discuss
these issues with their closest friends, let alone
strangers. In focus group discussions, as well as
key informant interviews, participants initially
hesitated to speak up and share matters of
sexual pleasure such as viewing porn. These
conversations 	were 	accompanied 	by 	giggles,
silence, as well as occasional expressions of
disgust, although people got bolder as the group
moved deeper into the discussions.
The disability rights activists who comprise our
respondents for this study all have their own
cellphones, all live in Kathmandu Valley, and all
were contacted via individuals or organizations
in the disability rights movement in Nepal. Hence
their experience is not necessarily an indicator
of 	the 	general 	population 	of 	persons 	with
disabilities in Nepal. For example, a telephone
survey conducted by SINTEF Technology and
Society in 2016 in 59 districts in Nepal found
that many persons with disabilities are still out
of reach of modern technology. In the study,
according to data from 2000 households with
disabilities, only one-fourth of the respondents
with disabilities in the telephone survey had
basic knowledge of computers, and only three-

-- 12 of 46 --

PAG E 13 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
fourths were independently operating mobile
phones. 15
This 	research 	provides 	a 	glimpse 	into 	the
experiences of a more formally educated, urban
subset of persons with disabilities. The issues
of access, discrimination, and silencing faced by
them can thus be assumed to be multiplied for
other persons with disabilities in Nepal that do
not have these privileges.
Another 	limitation 	relates 	to 	the 	handover
between researchers that happened in the course
of the research. One researcher conducted the
interviews, the qualitative data was translated
and transcribed in English, and working from
these transcripts, a second researcher worked
on the narrative. We acknowledge that some
of the nuances and contextual information of
the actual discussion might have been lost in
this process, though we have put utmost effort
towards mitigating this.
Feminist Ethical
Principles of Research
Feminist 	ethical 	principles 	have 	guided 	our
research. One of the cornerstones of research
guided by feminist values is having a process
that goes beyond informed consent.16 Through
focus group discussions and interviews that are
centered around personal experiences, with the
discussants as experts in their own lives, the
researchers aimed for an environment where
all views are given adequate time and value.
Another 	element 	has 	been 	acknowledging
positionality on the part of the researchers,
where 	researchers 	“reflect 	on 	their 	own
position and location in relation to their research
participants.”17 Such reflexivity helps researchers
explore how what we choose to study is a
reflection of our own views and experiences,
and an expression of our solidarities. In choosing
to explore the online experiences of women
15 	Eide. A.H, Neupane. S, Hem. K.G. (2016). Living conditions among people with disability in Nepal.
SINTEF Technology and Society. https://www.sintef.no/globalassets/sintef-a27656-nepal-printversionfinal.
pdf/
16 	Jenkins.K, Narayanaswamy. L, & Sweetman.C. (2019). Introduction: Feminist values in research,
Gender & Development, 27:3, 415-425, DOI: 10.1080/13552074.2019.1682311
17 	Ibid.
activists with disabilities, Body & Data builds on
its prior experiences working in digital rights, as
well as our experience of working closely with
disability rights activists on various issues.
In our research we consistently focus on the
subjective and diverse lived experiences of our
collaborators, how 	they 	navigate the 	world
online and offline, and challenge patriarchal and
ableist power structures in their own individual
ways.

-- 13 of 46 --

Women and queer persons with disabilities
expressing self and exploring sexuality online
PAG E 1 4 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
Operational definitions
SAFE SPACES:
For the purpose of the study ‘safe space’
is defined as a place or forum where
individuals who are marginalized come
together to communicate their experiences
without the fear of being judged, trolled and
attacked while also recognizing structural
oppressions and systems of power.
SEXUALITY:
For the purpose of the study, sexuality has
been defined as the way people experience
and express themselves sexually which
includes biological, erotic, physical, emotional,
social, or spiritual feelings and behaviors.18
“The right to sexuality on/in the internet is a
way of expressing the self and represents at the
same time exploration, affirmation, resistance
and transformation. We all need to understand
it and stand by it. Support should not be
denied and should be the political practice
of any advocate. And this is when a feminist
perspective of intersectionality, solidarity and
transformation helps to orient us in the noise
generated by the overwhelming horizontally
participatory 	conversations 	enhanced 	and
amplified on/in the internet.”19
18 	Human sexuality. (2019, April 8). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_sexuality
19 	vale, h. (2017). In plain sight: On sexuality, rights and the internet in India, nepal and Sri lanka. In
APC’s EROTICS South Asia exploratory research: Sex, rights and the internet (pp.11) https://www.apc.org/
sites/default/files/Erotics_1_FIND.pdf

-- 14 of 46 --

ofacc e s s
Aspectru m

-- 15 of 46 --

PAG E 1 6 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
A SPECTRUM OF ACCESS
20 	Lamsal.R.R, Pathak. S, Nepal. S, Bomrel. M. (April 2019) Exploring ICT in Empowering Persons with
Disabilities in Nepal. Deerwalk Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology. 1, 64-77,
21 	Samarajiva. R. (2018).ICT access and use by Persons with Disabilities (PWD) in Nepal. AfterAccess.
https://g3ict.org/publication/ict-access-and-use-by-persons-with-disabilities-pwd-in-nepal
22 	Atlas and Boots. (2020).Countries with the cheapest Internet in The World,. https://www.
atlasandboots.com/remote-work/countries-with-the-cheapest-internet-world/
23 	National Federation of the Disabled(2013). Disability Rights Holistic Monitoring Report.Nepal.
https://nfdn.org.np/holistic-report-of-disability-rights-monitoring/
While the potential exists for specially assistive
technologies in vision, communication, mobility
and learning to significantly increase accessibility
for PWDs20, their potential is a long way from
being realized.
Access issues include unequal access to devices
such as mobile phones. A study of information
and communication technology use by persons
with disabilities found that only 32% of PWDs
have 	access 	to 	a 	mobile 	phone. Of 	those
without phones, 65% pointed to their disability
as the reason they did not own a phone. 21
Though Nepal stands in 13th place 22 in the list
of countries with cheapest internet, the cost is
still high for citizens given the per capita.
Even when PWDs do have access to the internet,
online worlds are not built with their needs in
mind. In the context of Nepal, social dynamics
such as caste, gender, sexual orientation, race,
age, language barrier and economic class also
come into play as causes of exclusion.
After advocacy from disability rights groups,
the 	Nepali 	government 	has 	been 	providing
discounted voice packs for the visually impaired
if they submit their disability identity in the
telecom office. However, barriers still exist as
they range beyond just issues of affordability.
For people with disabilities, accessibility is not
just a concern regarding existing and available
technologies, but also the support needed for
PWDs to learn to effectively use and navigate
these digital technologies. For them, both the
hardware and the skills to use them are assistive
aids in an inaccessible world.
Our own research showed how the online
world’s default settings exclude PWDs. When
we reached out to PWDs with our quantitative
survey, only six people managed to participate.
In order to be able to include a larger number
of 	voices 	of 	PWDs, we 	had 	to 	design 	an
additional component, with in-person visits and
the requisite attention to translation and other
support needs. Our participants also noted how
these conversations around PWDs’ access to
the internet are not a part of policy discussions.
One 	of 	our 	participants 	noted 	that 	having
access to the internet doesn’t always mean that
everyone accesses it equally; questions about
how they are accessing it and where they are
accessing it are also important.
Having access to the internet often means
having certain prerequisites: a certain socio-
economic background, or having employment
and connectivity at work, or being from an
urban area that has internet infrastructure.
In 	charting 	the 	evolution 	of 	socio-cultural
norms around ability and disability in Nepal, a
review undertaken by the National Federation
of the Disabled-Nepal explores the shifting of
perspectives from prejudice towards PWDs
to seeing them as “beneficiaries of charity, and
services for which they should be grateful.”23 The
authors conclude that this results in services
that are “designed for them and delivered to
them, perhaps with the best of intentions, but
with insufficient consultation.”
Within the disability movement itself, the charity
model is heavily criticised because it is assumed
that people with disabilities must be “content”

-- 16 of 46 --

PAG E 1 7 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
with what they “receive”. The charity model
also created a dispute at the national level, in
the “prevalence 	of 	disabilities,”24 	where 	the
government has come up with a low prevalence
rate, which is shown by NGOs and self-help
organizations’ work to be an undercount. The
human rights model of disability recognises
disability as a natural part of human diversity
that must be respected and supported in all
its forms.25 It posits that the exclusion happens
because 	of 	a 	disabling 	environment. Hence,
changing 	the 	environment 	should 	not 	be
understood as something “given” to people
with disabilities but inherent in their rights.
Social 	barriers, discrimination 	and 	exclusion
keep PWDs from participating fully in their
society. 	They 	face 	barriers 	in 	access 	to
transportation, education, employment, health
services, 	and 	rampant 	discrimination 	with
72% of unemployed persons with disabilities
and 56% of employed persons with disabilities
reporting that “they have no dignity in social
participation.”26
Whether it is doctors routinely denying sexual
and reproductive health services to PWDs, not
having information tailored to PWDs,or constant
judgment for making any choice regarding their
body and self expression, PWDs face many
hurdles when it comes to accessing information
and services. For persons with disabilities, self
expression and sexual expression offline are
subject to constant judgment, discrimination
and even ridicule.
While the online space can provide alternative
forums for self expression in safe spaces and
groups of other PWDs, many of these offline
discriminations 	inevitably 	find 	their 	echoes
in the online world. PWDs are harassed in
mainstream online spaces, there is lack of content
tailored to PWD needs, they face inaccessible
technology and myriad other challenges daily.
Cultural perspectives towards girls and women
in 	Nepal 	are 	steeped 	also 	in 	protectionist
24 	Ibid
25 	Introducing a human rights model of Disability. Disability Advocacy Resource Unit. http://www.
daru.org.au/how-we-talk-about-disability-matters/introducing-the-human-rights-model-of-disability
26 	National Federation of the Disabled(2013). Disability Rights Holistic Monitoring Report.Nepal.
https://nfdn.org.np/holistic-report-of-disability-rights-monitoring/
lens, fixating on the assumption that they are
vulnerable to violence. There is a tendency to
perform overprotective parenting. Against this
backdrop, girls and women with disabilities face
additional barriers in using the internet freely
without constant surveillance on their online
behavior from family and caretakers. In these
circumstances, them accessing materials related
to 	sexuality 	and 	expressing 	one’s 	sexuality
online becomes challenging, despite access to
the internet.
Our interviewees shared several experiences
of encountering barriers to full access while on
the internet. One of the interviewees who used
a screen reader shared:
“I can read the words in English but I can’t
read Nepali words completely. Plus, in order
to read a pdf, another app is required.
So, 	everything 	cannot 	be 	seen 	nicely.
Sometimes, when people upload pictures,
the app doesn’t dictate it. It only says that
there’s a photo but we cannot know about
the photo, like what the photo is about.”
She 	also 	shared 	that 	accessing 	websites 	in
Nepali language is harder for the screen reader,
resulting in her and many other blind and vision
impaired users visiting fewer websites on the
internet.
For deaf and hard of hearing users the problems
are different. One of the interviewees shared
this concern about overwhelming English usage
on the internet and her preferred fluency in
Nepali. She said:
“I want to learn how to use Twitter. I have
heard what I can post there. But since [the
discussions there are] mostly in English, I
don’t 	want 	to 	have 	miscommunication
because I don’t know English that much.
I haven’t learnt it at all. Because I don’t
want to spend my entire day on the phone,
I don’t use it as often. It’s mostly Facebook,
messenger, viber 	and 	sometimes 	skype

-- 17 of 46 --

PAG E 1 8 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
because of work. Internationally, skype is
used for meetings so I use it.”
While using the internet to talk about their
daily lives, the women shared that they used
Facebook, Twitter and others platforms to post
things. However, a few of them shared that
there was a lot of miscommunication because
of language barriers, especially for deaf and hard
of hearing women.
One woman shared how her access to the
internet was mediated by her husband. This
isn’t an uncommon experience for WWDs. She
shared:
“I mostly share all my arts and paintings
on the internet. He (husband) tells me to
concentrate on my work and that he’ll look
after the (social media) posts. He does
most of these activities for me. I talk to my
foreigner friends online and do video calls
on Messenger. I have so many friends from
India. They are from Bangalore, Mumbai
and Delhi. There are many deaf people
there. I talk to them on video call. They
share things with me. This doesn’t happen
in Nepal.”
Another shared how the internet led her to
access community but her husband restricted
this access eventually.
“I have the desire to search things related
to art. I see and use the internet. And I also
research about what’s going on in the deaf
sector (community). Previously when I was
in college, I said that I would use signs to
communicate but he (husband) told me
not to use it (with anyone). I have my own
community. I should be able to use it in my
community. He could not understand it so
we had arguments.”
While 	these 	comments 	are 	only 	about
accessing and using the internet in general, the
problems with accessible content on sexual and
reproductive rights for women with disabilities
is more complex. In an interaction with the
interviewer, a woman with disability shared:
Interviewer: 	Do 	you 	really 	think 	the
information that is provided on the websites
are effective and has enough content about
sexuality?
Interviewee: 	Not 	sufficient. 	Sometimes
people interpret in a very negative way
and the materials are not even sufficient
to express more about it. When we talk
about porn they can’t be associated, like
those without visual impairment can access
it easily but for others (visually impaired),
audio is not enough.

-- 18 of 46 --

S e x u a l i t y 	a n d 	b o d i e s
o
f
P
W
D
—
a c u l t u r e 	o f 	s i l
e
n
c
e

-- 19 of 46 --

PAG E 2 0 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
SEXUALITY AND BODIES OF
PWD—A CULTURE OF SILENCE
27 	Hao.A.P. (2019 DEcember 4). Internet Freedom is Not Enough - Cyberfeminists Are Fighting For a
new reality. GENDERIT. ORG https://genderit.org/articles/internet-freedom-not-enough-cyberfeminists-are-
fighting-new-reality
28 	See page 11 for further discussion on “rights based approach”
Ani Phoebe Hao imagines the kind of digital
world we deserve; a world “where we have
more than our rights; we also have the pleasure
to enjoy our identities, practice our sexualities,
meet new people, access information and make
informed decisions about risks and pleasure.”27
This is an ideal that this research is also guided
by. However, a wide gulf exists between these
aspirations and Nepal’s ground realities. Far
from a discussion on women’s pleasure and
freedom of sexual expression, Nepali society
is one where even health issues related to
women’s sexuality and reproduction can be
taboo topics. Amidst this, talking about sexuality
of women with disabilities is so radical as to be
unthinkable.
Perhaps the environment in which the research
took 	place 	can 	be 	best 	summed 	up 	by 	a
participant who shared:
“Didi, we live in a society where we cannot
even talk openly about (something being
simple like) menstruation, talking openly
about sexuality is a dream that is very far
from reach.”
Similarly, other 	participants 	too 	shared 	the
discomfort 	they 	felt, 	in 	response 	to 	why
conversations on sexuality were not taking
place in their circles.
“Our context is such that women in Nepal
are not able to talk about sexuality openly.
Even as activists, we are not able to talk
about these basic health issues such as
white discharge, let alone issues of sexuality.”
“[We are informed about a lot of things
regarding sex and sexuality] but it is hard
to talk about these things openly.”
“Well the thing is no one really shares such
information 	to 	others 	although 	they 	go
through such articles.”
Women with disabilities we spoke to focused
on how being women in a patriarchal world
constrained their ability to have conversations
about sexuality. Like in many other societies
in South Asia, paternalistic notions of honor,
respect, and purity are attached to women, and
are used to police women’s sexual freedom and
reproductive health in Nepal.
“It is very awkward to talk with friends about
sex and sexuality in the context of Nepal. I can’t
talk with anyone. In my case I can’t talk with
my husband either. Most of the time I watched
porn with my husband. Actually, he taught me to
watch porn. But when we divorced, he blamed
me for being a characterless girl who watches
porn. We live in a country where talking about
sexuality is prohibited.”
Explicit conversations around sex and sexuality
are not easy given Nepal’s social circumstances.
In 	addition, the 	disability 	rights 	movement
in Nepal is led by high-caste Brahmin men,
campaign agendas are set by them, and sexuality
is 	not 	regarded 	as 	a 	priority 	within 	their
framework. The 	welfare 	approach 	from 	the
state, along with rights groups focus on rights
based approaches28 adopted lately still do not
favor taking an intersectional look into the
issues of women and girls within the movement.
Oppressive dominant discourses that result in
women being discouraged to speak up about,
explore, or express their sexuality are further

-- 20 of 46 --

PAG E 2 1 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
compounded for WWDs, who must contend
with 	even 	more 	conservative 	expectations
regarding the sexuality of PWDs.An added layer
of paternalism is extended towards persons
with disabilities, who are viewed regularly as
objects of pity, needing support, and incapable
of agency.This is seen in the widespread control
of WWDs’ 	sexual 	and 	reproductive 	health
with forced hysterectomies, forced abortions
and more across the globe.29 In a report to
the UN General Assembly in 2017, UN Special
Rapporteur, Catalina Devandas said:
“Discriminatory 	laws 	and 	policies 	are
undermining 	the 	fundamental 	right 	of
girls and young women with disabilities
to exercise choice and have control over
their bodies, violating their integrity and
depriving them of dignity while promoting
the interests of professionals and caregivers
instead.”
This reinforces what our interviewees told us
about how their sexual rights are seen both
within the home and in society at large. Those
with disabled bodies are routinely treated as
asexual beings, with the assumption that only
able-bodied persons could have any interest
or ability to participate in acts of pleasure. As
shared by a participant:
“This subject isn’t considered important.
No one thinks that disabled people also
have physical need, they do not need sex
and they do not have interest about sex.
Sex is only for abled people. That may be
the reason for not talking about sexuality.
But we are raising voice for this.”
These social expectations and intersectional
oppressions result in a fear of judgment and
reluctance to speak about these issues.This was
highlighted in this individual interview with a
senior disability rights activist:
Interviewee: Just 	because 	someone 	has
disability does not mean that the person
doesn’t 	have 	sexuality. 	Disability 	has
29 	(2017 October24).Forced sterilization of young women with disabilities must end, UN rights
expert says [White Paper]. OHCHR. https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.
aspx?NewsID=22289&LangID=E
nothing to do with one’s sexuality.These are
two different things.
Interviewer: Have you ever shared these
sentiments on the internet?
Interviewee: No.
Interviewer:Why not?
Interviewee: It’s 	like 	people 	might 	start
looking 	at 	you 	differently. People 	pass
negative comments so I learn these things
that I need to learn, but do not post them
on social media.
Interviewer:Why?
Interviewee: I feel like people will make
negative evaluations, that’s why.
Interviewer: But, you are also the chairperson
of the organization right?
Interviewee: Umm…Umm
Interviewer: You have this strong identity.
And a lot of people on Facebook might also
know that you are working on reproductive
health all but why do you have the fear?
Interviewee:This is a strange thing.We know
that these things are hidden and not talked
about much in society.We should take it as
a simple thing. Just like food, shelter and
clothes, it is also one of the basic needs.
Even 	if 	we 	are 	talking 	about 	these 	in
friends circle, it is still hard to open up on
these topics.
It is difficult to move beyond the dominant
discourse on disability and sexuality of PWDs
as asexual beings— and to acknowledging their
sexuality being as normal as anybody else in
society.
Being seen as either
asexual or hypersexual
Across the world, disabled bodies are seen as
not desirable, too defective to engage in sex. In
Nepal, WWDs are often treated as if they are
asexual, with the added assumptions that they

-- 21 of 46 --

PAG E 2 2 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
are incapable of engaging in a sexual relationship,
and unable to bear and raise children.”30
Thus when PWDs engage in any expressions
of their sexual selves, this goes against general
expectations, and 	the 	pendulum 	swings 	to
the other side with them being perceived as
hypersexual. When forced to choose between
society’s binary of being asexual or hypersexual,
many of the participants in our study choose
to err on the side of the identity that comes
with lesser social risk i.e. being seen as asexual.
Participants avoided talking about their identities
as sexual beings online, to prevent the negative
repercussions of being labeled hypersexual. This
was, in many ways, a strategy for survival.
Hypersexuality is a charge that is regularly levied
against women who so much as acknowledge
that 	they 	have 	sexual 	desire, 	even 	within
the confines of a married relationship. This
patriarchal narrative where a woman’s sexual
desire can easily be rephrased as a negative
comment on her character has routinely been
used by men to shame women. Being a WWD
of 	whom 	asexuality 	is 	the 	expected 	norm
makes accusations of hypersexuality stick even
stronger.
The net result of all these microaggressions
is rampant self censorship, which has been an
overarching theme throughout this research.
Participants, when speaking of their experience,
routinely described strategies of not attracting
unwanted sexual attention to themselves, and
censoring themselves on social media in order
to escape negative attention. When, during a
focus group discussion, one of the participants
said,
“We don’t really put anything like that
out 	there 	that 	would 	attract 	negative
comments,”
...the agreement in the room was palpable.
The lack of WWD-led narratives online also
contributes 	to 	the 	issue 	of 	sexuality 	and
disability remaining hidden – without models of
30 	Kayastha, S. (2016). Sexuality of women with physical disabilities: Experience and realities [Masters
dissertation, Tribhuvan University]. Tribhuvan University Library.
WWD discussing sexuality online, it is difficult
to make space, even in the imagination, for
discussion on these issues.
When speaking about these implicit things in
society, there is an understanding it will raise
controversy. So even though these conversations
are deemed important, there might be other
agendas that activists are working on that they
do not wish to risk. Their community or circles
might require them to ensure that they do not
raise issues that will invite “negative comments”
or cause people to “start looking at [them]
differently.”
The fear of being deemed hypersexual, and the
subsequent loss of one’s credibility carries a high
risk, especially for those engaged in activism.
If acknowledgement of sexuality of women and
PWDs is hard to come by, conversations on
pleasure and sharing of pleasurable content is
even more so. The following was shared by a
participant, almost as a confession:
“I myself watch such things (talking about
porn) but I can’t tell even my closest people
to watch it. (laughs)”
The social “conspiracy of silence” around the
sexuality of WWDs is strong. Something as
natural as sexual pleasure itself is made to
seem like an indulgence, and confessions of
being engaged in sexual pleasure run the risk
of judgment.
Changing times
All 	our 	participants 	quoted 	so 	far 	have
demonstrated how the internet has been a
source 	of 	information 	on 	sexuality, 	sexual
health, and a source of sexual pleasure. Most of
our discussants had been part of conversations
around disability and sexuality in formal or
informal settings. They spoke of the need to
have wider acceptance for PWD’s sexuality, and
were conversant on sexual and reproductive
health rights as well as issues of consent. Since
this information is hard to come by from other

-- 22 of 46 --

PAG E 2 3 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
sources owing to lack of open conversations
on the issue in relevant circles, the internet has
been valuable for those able to access it.
However, 	access 	is 	not 	a 	given, 	especially
for those with disabilities, and content is not
always 	tailored 	to 	their 	needs. In 	addition,
simply accessing information is not enough; for
meaningful change to occur, public conversations
on pleasure and consent need to happen.
As stated by a participant:
“Sex is a need but it should be engaged
in with mutual consent. But girls are not
talking about this topic, because if they talk,
other people start to see them negatively.”
In 	this 	manner, assumptions 	that 	associate
willingness to talk about sexuality, pleasure and
consent with being promiscuous lead to fears
of social disapproval, which in turn prevents
consensual, mutually beneficial exploration of
pleasure.
Some respondents shared that the internet
is 	slowly 	helping 	these 	conversations 	take
place among WWD. In their own words, a
few 	interviewees 	described 	talking 	about
these issues as a sign of openness (“frank”), as
opposed to the social tag applied to it as being
provocative or immoral.
“The internet has changed this context a
lot.”
“I know a lot of information from online
sources. I am very frank about these issues.”
Our participants also emphasized that having
these conversations is important in another
way:
“Nepal 	Disabled 	Women 	Association
(NDWA) 	has 	now 	been 	talking 	about
sexual 	and 	reproductive 	rights. 	Before
that, with regards to even something like
marriage [in terms of marriage advocacy
for PWD], I could not even envision that I
myself could be married. But now I am in a
31 	vale, h. (2017). In plain sight: On sexuality, rights and the internet in India, nepal and Sri lanka. In
APC’s EROTICS South Asia exploratory research: Sex, rights and the internet (pp.13)
happily married life.”
This 	anecdote 	is 	an 	example 	of 	how
conversations 	about 	disability 	and 	sexuality
can broaden the range of futures that a woman
with a disability is able to imagine for herself,
whether that future includes marriage, a family
and sexual pleasure or not. There is a need for
more spaces to have these conversations and
open up more possibilities for expressing one’s
sexuality and visibility online.
While the internet has provided a platform
for 	discussions 	about 	sexuality, participants
emphasized 	that 	these 	discussions 	are 	not
happening, and that they are not using the
internet for sexual expression.
There could be multiple reasons for this, chief
among them a narrow understanding of the
word 	“sexuality,” 	and 	“sexual 	expression.”
In fact, we found in our research that quite a
few activists did not think they were engaged
in conversations about sexuality online, even
as they spoke of instances of sharing content
related to their attendance at conferences on
disability and sexuality.
In addition, a large number of participants shared
the multiple ways in which they engaged in self-
expression and exploration of pleasure online
– including sharing beautiful photos, videos of
singing and dancing and other explorations of
beauty and pleasure, while not labeling them as
expressions of sexuality.
Discussing sexuality
Even when people do want to talk about these
issues, they find the language difficult.As with the
English word sexuality, which because of “sex”
at its root is regarded as a delicate subject,31
the Nepali word for “sexuality” is translated as
“younikta” (यौिनकता) with “youn” at its root –
which is also “sex” but with an even stronger
connotation of being just sex and nothing else.
In addition, the word is a relatively recent import
adapted from English and not part of everyday

-- 23 of 46 --

PAG E 2 4 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
speech or writing. As such, there is no common
cultural understanding of the word and concept
of “younikta.” As we saw time and again, it is
also understood by most research participants
to have a narrower definition, as something
directly related to the physical act of sex, rather
than to a person’s daily physical, cultural, or
social expression as a sexual (or asexual) being.
These 	twin 	issues 	connected 	to 	the 	word
“younikta” mean that in Nepali society, the
word is already quite charged with assumptions
of decency/indecency. Further, it is also likely
to invite accusations of imported activism. This
complicates our understanding of what our
research participants are telling us, requiring
us to go beyond the word itself to understand
the 	phenomenon. A 	more 	expansive 	term
that can bring together concepts of beauty,
appreciation, self expression, self exploration,
and reproductive health is unavailable for these
conversations yet.
For example, participants were unanimous in
emphasizing that discussions about sexuality are
not occurring and repeatedly pointing out the
strong societal reluctance to discuss sexuality.
While 	this 	undoubtedly 	exists, 	many 	also
asserted that even though they were activists
leading the work at the intersection of disability
rights and sexual and reproductive health rights,
they themselves were not able to engage in
online discussions of sexuality.
However, a few of these conversations indicate
otherwise. A glimpse of this in this interview
with a disability rights activist working on issues
of sexuality:
Interviewer: Do you post about sexuality on
Facebook when you are working on those
issues?
Participant: It’s been 6 months of working
on 	sexuality. I 	haven’t 	posted 	anything
about sexuality.
Interviewer: When 	you 	go 	to 	different
programs of sexuality and speak about
sexuality, don’t you post that on social
media?
Participant:Yes, I do. I post if I give a speech
or I participate in those programs.
Interviewer: That means you post about
sexuality.
Participant: Maybe yes.
The 	exchange 	revealed 	another 	unspoken
assumption in conversations about sexuality,
that it probably has to do with one’s personal
life and intimate details, and not one’s activism
or public presence.
Another activist participant also shared how
she put up photos of conferences on issues of
sexuality, deliberately ensuring that the banner
is fully visible. The participant, however, was
unsure whether this counted as an example of
her using online forums to share issues around
sexuality.
These examples indicate an implicit assumption
that discussions of sexuality are confessions
of personal bedroom-related matters. Such an
assumption makes, in people’s imagination, any
discussions on sexuality fraught with a higher
level of risk than is warranted.
As can be seen in the anecdotes above, our study
participants felt that an acceptance by society of
sexuality of WWD holds tremendous potential
for richer, more fulfilling lives for women with
disabilities, yet only minimal attention is paid to
this issue. And when these issues are brought
up and given attention, it is of the negative kind.
Safe spaces are starting points
for robust discussions about
disability and sexuality
Safe spaces (whether among friends, among
colleagues who are working on the same issues,
or in international conferences) were brought
up by many participants as the only places where
they can have discussions on sexual expression.
“I do not talk about these issues in front
of men, but in this group, I can talk very

-- 24 of 46 --

PAG E 2 5 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
comfortably about these issues.”
“We mostly don’t talk about these kinds
of topics. We sometimes talk about it in
forums, because we can’t talk about it
anywhere. We basically don’t talk about it
[often], so, when it appears on the internet,
I watch it.”
Participants also spoke of creating safe spaces
for themselves online. They shared anecdotes
on how they carefully curated their Facebook
friends list to create safe spaces, accepting
requests only from close friends, family, and the
disability community. Thus, keeping themselves
away from demeaning and judgmental attitudes
towards 	women 	with 	disabilities 	that 	are
encountered in the mainstream.
These responses indicate both a desire that
these online spaces be able to host meaningful
conversations around disability and sexuality,
and a frustration that they have been unable to
do so until now.
Of note is also the conflating of the internet
with social media, especially for countries like
Nepal where increase in access to internet
coincided with the Facebook era. The internet
subscription rate in Nepal is 55.6% 32 and mobile
users is 136%33
. When asked about their online
experiences, all our respondents first shared
their 	experiences 	on 	Facebook, 	indicating
that the bulk of people’s online lives in Nepal
are now spent on Facebook. In one of the
focus group discussions, 9 out of 10 people
said they used the internet, the 10th person
said she used only email, implying she did not
consider email as being “the internet.” The most
common social media platform is Facebook,
and Facebook Messenger is commonly used for
communication within the community; statistics
32 	Internet World Stats. (2019).Asia Mobile and Broadband Report [Report] https://www.
internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm
33 	Nepal Telecom. (2020 May 24). Mobile, Broadband and Internet Penetration in Nepal. https://www.
nepalitelecom.com/2017/07/mobile-internet-broadband-penetration-nepal.html
34 	Pandey.S, Raj.Y. Free Float Internet Policies of Nepal. Studies in Nepali History and Society 21(1):
1–60 June 2016 © Martin Chautari (pp. 37)
35 	vale, h. (2017). In plain sight: On sexuality, rights and the internet in India, nepal and Sri lanka. In
APC’s EROTICS South Asia exploratory research: Sex, rights and the internet (pp.11) https://www.apc.org/
en/pubs/erotics-south-asia-exploratory-research-sex-rights-and-internet
show that Facebook alone accounts for 97% of
social media usage in Nepal.34
As we will see later in the report, the participants
in our study used Facebook for a wide range of
activities, including connecting with friends and
family, making new friends, and getting updated
on the news in general as well as disability
issues in particular. However, the limitations
of Facebook may also have contributed to
discouraging online sexual expression. Facebook
is a space where you can find your parents,
employers, friends, lovers, along with all their
expectations and judgments that can result in
high self-censorship.
In the context of over reliance on Facebook by
our cohort of interviewees, we are constantly
reminded that:
“For a meaningful dialogue the space of the
internet needs to be integrated, enriched
and not limited or concentrated on social
media.[...] 	They 	need 	respectful 	and
ethically built spaces to host dissent and
provide privacy, avoiding the performance
and per-formative modality privileged by
social media.”35
Even though these issues are not as easy to
discuss online, early and hopeful indications that
they are happening are visible.

-- 25 of 46 --

U
s
e
o
f
	thei n t e r n e t
	f
o
r
s
e
l
f
-
e
x
pr e s s i on
	by
	P
W
D

-- 26 of 46 --

PAG E 2 7 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
USE OF THE INTERNET FOR
SELF-EXPRESSION BY PERSONS
WITH DISABILITIES
36 	Lorde.A. (1984). Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power. Tucson, AZ: Kore press. https://
uk.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-binaries/11881_Chapter_5.pdf
37 	Lorde.A. (1984). Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power. Tucson, AZ: Kore press. https://
uk.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-binaries/11881_Chapter_5.pdf
“When I go to any programs, I post details
about 	the 	programs 	and 	the 	fun 	with
family members. If I go somewhere with
my friends, I share about it as well… I use
Tiktok too. I keep making videos. Most deaf
people don’t use it.When I use Tiktok, I feel
like I can hear myself and I feel like I am
not deaf. So I use Tiktok and make videos.”
Self-expression and sexual expression were not
seen as related by most of our study participants.
While questions on sexual expression mostly
revealed the frustration of not being able to
have meaningful conversations online regarding
sexuality of WWD, questions on self expression
elicited a wider range of answers regarding
online 	activities 	that 	our 	participants 	were
engaged in.
When we understand sexuality and the erotic
through Audre Lorde’s definition as a sense of
deep fulfillment and full expression of a woman’s
feeling and being 36 , we are able to appreciate
the wide range of ways in which participants in
our study engaged in erotic expressions online,
particularly on Facebook. This section attempts
to capture the myriad ways our participants
engaged in self-expression as well as sexual
expression online, with the caveat that our
participants did so without either considering
or labelling them as sexual expression.
Most of our participants used Facebook for
sharing personal messages such as birthday
wishes. A majority of them also shared a lot of
work related information, including upcoming
job vacancies and training opportunities for
the disability community. Apart from Facebook,
participants also reported using Youtube for
inspirational 	songs, 	movies, 	and 	videos 	of
persons with disabilities. A few shared that they
used Google for studying and email for work.
Some of our respondents also shared how
they were using Facebook as a forum for self-
expression, sharing content around self-love
and creative expression, as well as venting. As
was described:
“I act, and dance, so I put up videos.”
“I share a lot of pictures in my status
updates. I like to write also, so I write poems
and such on Facebook. It feels good to post
my pictures and writings. I write poems or
other status updates about once a week
and I use Facebook all the time. It’s like a
friend to me.”
“When I get frustrated, or have something
I can’t tell people face to face, I write and
share on Facebook.”
Through Lorde’s lens that “blurs the boundaries
between the erotic, on the one hand, and
political, creative, and everyday activities, on the
other,” we can look at these expressions as a
“creative force for revolutionary change”.37
Our research participants reported regularly
using the internet for receiving information on
beauty, sexuality and sexual health. Although
only a very few understood these activities as
falling under the umbrella of sexual or erotic
expression, below 	are 	a 	few 	quotes 	from

-- 27 of 46 --

PAG E 2 8 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
participants that show the range of information
that they got from online sources:
“I watch how-to videos on reducing acne,
hair care and beauty routines. I get a lot of
cramps, and look at how to reduce cramps.
I learnt about hot water soaks, and eating
chocolate, and how these help.”
Here, 	our 	discussant 	reveals 	the 	multiple
aspects of her erotic self that are important to
her, and the variety of information on beauty,
sexuality and reproductive health she seeks
online to inform her in her goals of beauty and
self care. Though most of such content online is
not necessarily created with a WWD in mind,
as long as WWD’s physical disability is not
a barrier to accessing this information, their
experiences online have enriched their offline
lives. Of course, most participants still had
barriers to access, especially those with sight
and hearing related disabilities, who could not
benefit from a lot of such how-to videos and
other content aimed at able-bodied women.
The need for content online that is tailored to
the disability community is further demonstrated
by this quote from another participant:
“...And many friends are exploring about
sex toys. Many cases of married women
who have spinal cord injuries have problems
in sexual life. Even unmarried women do
use sex toys generally in city areas more
than rural areas.”
The participant indicates how some forms of
disability, such as spinal cord injuries, might close
off the “traditional” routes of sexual pleasure
through sex. When sex as an act is rendered
difficult or impossible by a disability, sex toys
provide an option for the fulfilment of one’s
sexual needs. Here too, those with a disability
such as a spinal cord injury are able to access
the internet with greater ease than those with
hearing or sight related difficulties, and so are
able to explore online options such as sex toys.
38 	Moses.G. (2018 August 28). Why Disability Representation Matters (And not just in Media). The
Body is not an Apology https://thebodyisnotanapology.com/magazine/why-disability-representation-
matters-and-not-just-in-the-media/
39 	Kusher. D. (2019 September 4). Brief History of Porn on the Internet. Wired https://www.wired.com/
story/brief-history-porn-internet/
However, even for those who do not have
problems accessing content meant for able-
bodied people, the problem of representation
is real. Being able to see oneself in the content
that is online is a valuable experience that can
make the space feel more like one’s own.38
The inclusion of PWDs in content-making also
brings the possibility of addressing issues and
experiences that are particular to disabilities;
issues that are less likely to be on the radar of
mainstream content creators.
One 	of 	our 	respondents 	also 	shared 	her
experience of looking for porn videos, and being
disappointed at not finding representations of
bodies of persons with disabilities:
“I was looking for porn videos of PWD
having sex, but I could not find any. We
women with disabilities are seen as [...]
asexual …”.
Porn, one of the earliest things that the internet
became known for39, still does not cater to
those with disabled bodies. Our respondents
also mentioned accessible porn, indicating that
porn catered to an abled audience would not
do.
Self-censoring the
online persona
The activists in the research mentioned how
they would use the internet for ‘good’ reasons
given their public figures as activists and social
workers. When probed further to elaborate,
they stated that it involved sharing information
and 	news 	about 	what 	is 	happening 	in 	the
disability rights groups and communities, and
talking about their work and events of their
organisations. On the other hand, there is an
understanding that sharing a lot of personal
information, 	especially 	related 	to 	sad 	or
distressing topics, is not encouraged; they feel

-- 28 of 46 --

PAG E 2 9 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
the need to be motivating and encouraging to
PWDs in their online spaces.
“I don’t upload much as well. I mostly share
inspiring things so that people can get
inspired and learn something through them.
I also share things that touch my heart.”
“People post things about suicide. Like how
they want to kill themselves. There are
times when they personally message me
and share these things.This not only affects
them but us as well in a very negative
way. People should not share these things
on 	Facebook. People 	should 	only 	share
motivational stuff.”
“It was New Year’s Day when me and some
of my friends had been to a club. I had
shared it on Facebook too. The next day
the head of the organization called me
and told me that I should not be posting
such things on Facebook. He told me that
I am the leader of the future so I should
not post such stuff. He told me not to post
other personal pictures too. The ones not
associated with the organization. I agreed
with 	what 	he 	said 	about 	not 	to 	post
clubbing ones but I could not agree with
what he said about not to post my personal
pictures. Ahh! It’s my choice.Totally!”
The belief that leaders in the movement need
to be motivational for others in the community
is also imposed within the community itself.
Emotions 	related 	to 	sadness 	are 	seen 	as
‘negative’.
Participant 1: I also used to post a lot of
pictures on the internet on a daily basis.
Some of my sisters (colleagues from the
movement) told me that being a member
of the organization, I should not be posting
a lot of pictures along with the captions
[captions that conveyed personal feelings,
including sad ones]. ….They told me that if
I post such, then I will be taken negatively
so I have been trying to post as less as I can.
I control myself from posting pictures…
They say, “Oh! You had posted pictures on
the internet! Why???”They scold me. I know
they say things that would be good for me so
I don’t take it negatively.We are the people
working in an organization, there are lots of
people who learn things from us.We should
motivate them. I am still controlling myself. I
am trying to improve myself.
Participant 2: It’s not that she can’t write.
It’s just that the things that she’d write on
the internet will be seen by her followers
and they’ll get the wrong idea and message
which further demotivates them. If you
want to post photos along with a caption,
do it but make sure that the caption is
positive and good.
The 	pressure 	to 	share 	only 	‘motivational’
and positive information on social media also
restricts the participants from expressing their
sexuality the way they desire.
“I had also posted a picture wearing a
dress online and some people messaged
me saying that I should not wear such
dresses and that I look far better in jeans.
I had neither worn that dress while going
to work nor had anyone at work seen me
wearing that in person. I had merely posted
that online.”
“My husband and I had clicked a kissing
picture which I uploaded on social media.
My husband was against it and asked
me why I posted such a picture on social
media. I replied to him saying that it was a
very precious moment so I posted it. I don’t
know exactly when but later I deleted that
post and yes, regretted [having to delete
it]. Nowadays I am very careful about
what I share and post online. Even if we
post personal things, [our] organization is
attached to it. So it’s crucial to be careful.
“Well the question is – being an activist we
become careful and conscious about what
we post online and we don’t post the things
that we want to.We are not able to express
it, right? Like I want to post a picture kissing
my partner and that is part of my sexuality.
So we are controlling our sexuality for the
sake of activism… I might fancy to post
hundreds of selfies that I love and that’s
entirely my choice. But because of our work,
activism and fear we [are not able to]…”

-- 29 of 46 --

PAG E 3 0 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
How disabled bodies are
represented online
Narratives about bodies of PWD are replete
with the assumption that their bodies are not
just 	aesthetically 	ugly, but 	also 	functionally
deficient, unable to perform important functions,
especially reproductive ones.
The medical model of disability and “social
construction of the impaired body as passive
and 	dependent”40 	views 	disabled 	bodies 	as
deficient and undesirable. These views about
disabled 	bodies 	are 	further 	reinforced 	by
views of women’s sexuality which has tended
to dehumanize and infantilize women. 41 These
intersectional 	discriminations 	build 	on 	each
other, leading to bodies of WWD being denied
the respect, agency, and personhood afforded
to other bodies.
Our research participants shared that, above all,
their bodies are not even expected in online
spaces. Many of our discussants shared how able
bodied people are always surprised when they
encounter someone with a disability online.
PWD frequently use Facebook and the internet
but other people don’t know that PWD can
also use Facebook.
Our 	research 	participants 	shared 	their
experiences of uploading photos online, and
getting negative comments, even from their
Facebook 	circles 	of 	trust. These 	comments
illustrate the kinds of bodies that women with
disabilities in Nepal are expected to have, the
way they are expected to carry those bodies,
and also the lines that circumscribe acceptable
forms of sexual expressions for WWD in Nepal.
Our 	participants 	reported 	receiving 	many
messages of appreciation, which upon further
examination, were not appreciation at all. Instead
they were disclaimers that spoke of participant
expectations 	that 	disabled 	bodies 	are 	not
beautiful, and bodies that are beautiful cannot
belong to PWD. “You don’t seem disabled”
40 	Christina S.A., Lucia S.A. (2017). Yes, we fuck! Challenging the misfit sexual body through
disabled women’s narratives. Sage Journals. 21(3), 303-318. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/
full/10.1177/1363460716688680
41 	Ibid.
seems to be the most common message that
WWDs who fit conventional social definitions
of beauty receive online.
For 	example, 	when 	asked 	what 	kinds 	of
comments 	she 	receives 	on 	her 	photos, 	a
participant said:
“Mostly 	appreciation. 	People 	say 	that
my photos don’t seem like I belong to a
community with disability. Sometimes I post
pictures of me giving a speech, attending
various programs, visiting different places.
People say that I post beautiful pictures
while attending programs. I post pictures of
me when I go abroad as well. And, people
get a shock. (Laughs)”
While at first glance this seems like a compliment
and was taken as such by many recipients,
there are various assumptions that the person
who complimented internalized. One is that
disability and beauty are mutually exclusive – so
if the person has appraised you as beautiful, you
cannot be disabled.
Another telling reaction is the one of “shock”
on photos of foreign travel by a WWD, which
also makes assumptions on the range of life
experiences available to persons with disabilities.
It is the compliment-giver’s expectation that
those with disabilities cannot attend and give
speeches at international programs.
In the same vein, another participant with a
strong interest in beauty and makeup shared
this experience:
“I used to wear full makeup earlier…and
people did not think I was disabled. ‘When
we 	look 	at 	you 	in 	photos…you 	don’t
seem disabled (using derogatory words for
disability)’.’ Are you trying to attract and
confuse men?’ These types of comments
come 	on 	Facebook 	and 	also 	from 	the
(disability) 	community 	itself. 	I 	started
deleting those comments, now I only have
people 	from 	the 	disability 	community,

-- 30 of 46 --

PAG E 3 1 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
and a few members from my family (on
Facebook).”
Here too, we see how beauty and beautification
is assumed to be irrelevant for disabled bodies.
In 	addition, men 	seeing 	a 	beautiful 	woman
through the hetero-normative ideas of desire
and 	sexuality, upon 	finding 	out 	that 	she 	is
disabled, assume 	that 	this 	must 	have 	been
done on purpose, to get them attracted and
confused. The participants often used language
that marked clear binaries between beautiful
and not, on the basis of body-ability, and they
tended to think of themselves as unattractive.
How technology can facilitate
expressions of sexuality
In addition to receiving information on sexuality,
reproductive health, and engaging in discovery
of sexuality through pornography, participants
also shared that they have used the Internet as a
medium for expressing their sexuality, whether
in private chats or on online dating sites.
“Offline, there are no accessible places
where we can go for dates or meet people.
Before we meet someone, we are able
to see their pictures, have video chats.”
“Basically people are not open about sex
but they do sexual activities like video chat,
sharing pictures. Some of my friends also
do that but people don’t talk openly so real
data about people exploring their sexuality
on the internet is not available.The Internet
plays a vital role for sexual activity among
partners. It is easy, we don’t need to meet
people, have physical contact and there is
not any chance of having STDs. It is safe
and private.”
These quotes show how offline spaces are
restrictive for PWDs, especially in terms of
sexual expression, and how technology could
work around that. Through video chats and
sharing of images, a subset of women with
disabilities are able to engage in explorations of
42 	Cohen-Rottenberg, R. (2017, September 28). Where Are All the Disabled People in the Body
Positivity Campaigns? The Body is Not an Apology. https://thebodyisnotanapology.com/magazine/where-
are-all-the-disabled-people-in-the-body-positivity-campaigns/
sexual pleasure online, which might even have
some advantages over in-person explorations
in terms of safety: safety from STDs, protection
of privacy, and (comparative) ease of access.
However, the downside is that there is still
limited privacy and safety for women with
disabilities while using the internet because
such realities are not generally not reflected in
the movement. It becomes important then to
see how addressing these concerns can include
the needs and desires of WWD.
A space to explore one’s
many identities
Persons 	with 	disabilities, 	especially 	visible
disabilities, generally cannot compartmentalize
their disability, to opt out of being identified with
it. Often it happens that their disability eclipses
all other facets of their personalities in the eyes
of society. Walking around with disabled bodies,
one experiences how “people stare but they
don’t see; they look at the disabled body and
can’t see the person.”42
However, on the internet, things are different;
one can choose which of one’s multiple identities
to display or keep private. Our participants,
especially those with visible disabilities such as
those using assistive devices and equipment,
commented that the Internet was the first
avenue that gave them a choice to not share
their 	disability 	status, 	ensuring 	that 	their
disability identity is not the only lens they are
seen through. For many, this act allowed them
to explore other, less-visible aspects of their
identity. Many of these experiences emphasized
how this simple choice helped them escape
the pitying that comes with the label of being
disabled. These have provided some respite
from the constant attention being given to their
disability in the offline world.
Many shared examples of this experimentation:
“I do not think Facebook needs to be a true
reflection…we do not want to advertise

-- 31 of 46 --

PAG E 3 2 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
our disability there…we can limit what we
share.Those who know (about my disability)
know, those who don’t know don’t need to
know.”
For some WWDs, this has been an example of
agency they were exercising online.
Participants also shared 	their choice to not
share their disability status with everyone on
Facebook, adding that they shared it on an
individual basis when they felt ready. Upon
knowing of their disability, people that WWDs
had 	been 	talking 	to 	on 	Facebook 	either
completely avoided them, or conversely, asked
too many questions. Either way, the relationship
changed.
“I do not have my disability status on
Facebook.There are some people who stop
talking to me when they find out that I am
blind, and then there are some people that
get hyper curious, and start talking even
more.”
These social experiments online have not only
allowed 	our 	participants 	to 	slowly 	explore
aspects of their identities, but also provided
them with a window into how the world around
them really thinks and feels about them.
One of our participants shared the example of
her friend, who went from deliberately leaving
out her identity as a PWD on Facebook, to then
deliberately including it to stop being the target
of unwanted attention.
“A good looking close friend of mine uploads
her pictures in a way that the wheelchair
is not visible. She was getting a lot of
unwanted messenger calls from men, and
was in a lot of stress. She was asking me
for advice and I asked her to upload a full
picture of herself. Once she uploaded that
picture, those calls stopped. So we realized
that these things (our disabilities) might not
be talked about, but affect people.”
This 	quote 	expresses 	how 	disabled 	bodies
are 	discriminated 	against, 	and 	even 	when
people are trying to project an image of being
“tolerant” 	or “sensitive,” 	their 	conventional
ideas of sexuality of WWD become visible in
these encounters. While the participant was
conventionally desired by a lot of men, the
desire was contingent on assumptions of her
able-bodiedness and collapsed with knowledge
of her disability. Encountering conventional ideas
of desirable bodies that do not have space for
WWDs show how far we have to go in order
for the sexuality of PWD to be acknowledged,
let alone for disabled bodies to be objects of
desire.
SRHR activists in our research also shared their
experiences of going a step beyond receiving
information on reproductive health to sharing it
with others online, despite the risks it entailed.
“There was a post on “Period” and I shared
it on Facebook because people say bad
things to women which are negative and
also a kind of domination towards women.
It had appeared on my newsfeed. I keep
sharing such posts.”
Here, our discussant speaks of various ways in
which she has been using her online presence
when she shares such content. Her dedication to
“keep sharing” these posts and keep engaging in
these acts of resistance online is an expression of
her agency, as well as an important contribution
to ensuring alternative narratives are amplified.
However, safety on these platforms is not a
given, and 	some 	of 	the 	paternalistic 	forces
that 	are 	policing 	women’s 	behavior 	offline
also make their presence felt online. A few of
the participants who were using online dating
platforms shared their experiences, which were
largely negative:
“This one time, [...] I was on my desktop
and I got into those kinds of sites where I
had to make my profile. [...] Then I started
getting texts. I was totally surprised by
why I was getting such texts. I looked at it
but didn’t reply. I got a message from this
one person. He seemed genuine. We had
a good conversation at the beginning. He
said “ Yes I know you’ve landed on this site
without knowing about it. You are not that
kind of person who lands into such places
So, you just delete it and exit. I asked what

-- 32 of 46 --

PAG E 33 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
it is all about? He didn’t explain much but
yeah I remember happening such things to
me landing into such unknown apps and
space. Later on I deleted it hurriedly.
I 	can’t 	say 	about 	others 	but 	in 	my
experience it went very bad. After 6 month
of my separation with my husband I tried
to date online but my brother scolded me
because of my previous experience. I also
got scared. I don’t feel safe dating online.”
These two experiences show how the patriarchal
policing of women’s sexuality and sexuality of
WWDs works in tandem online and offline, and
often through one’s own family. Our participant
was judged because she was perceived as “not
that kind of person” and asked to delete her
profile whereas another was scolded by her
brother until she was scared. Having a profile on
online dating sites is another act that makes one
seem “hypersexual”, and women’s admissions of
their own sexuality through having a profile on
dating sites, seemed to be too much for their
own close ones to handle.
In 	the 	focus 	group 	discussions, participants
agreed that online dating sites are not worth
the risk – that it invites too much negative
attention 	and 	judgment. They 	were 	of 	the
opinion 	that 	sharing 	feelings 	with 	people
through chatting options on other social sites
(especially Facebook) was sufficient.
However, for a queer PWD who participated in
the study, the experience is different -
“I identify myself as queer person[...], to
find a partner I use dating apps but mostly
dating apps in Nepal are used only used for
sexual fun, if I want to have sex then I can
open the app and find a partner…”
They also added,
“From dating apps, I can search partners
according to my preference. We would talk
like, talk secretly. Everything starts from
online, and 	then 	goes 	offline. In 	queer
community, everything starts from online.”

-- 33 of 46 --

L
a
c
k
o
f
s
afe
	spacesonline

-- 34 of 46 --

PAG E 35 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
LACK OF SAFE SPACES ONLINE
Participant conversations pointed to a need for
more safe spaces for WWD to have discussions
on 	sexual 	expression. However, apart 	from
their own Facebook pages, we did not hear any
specific instances of safe spaces during these
conversations with women with disabilities. In
comparison, during the first phase of EROTICS
survey among gay men and activist women,
participants in those groups had shared the
existence of secret groups that functioned as
safe spaces.
As mentioned earlier, disability rights activists
are creating safer experiences within their own
Facebook circles by avoiding adding unknown
people from outside the disability community.
While the individuals are using agency to build
a space that they desire within the community,
this seclusion is also out of a necessity to
prevent bullies and harassers. If not combined
with other ways to communicate with the
wider 	community, 	this 	strategy 	limits 	the
conversations on sexual expression of women
with disabilities to only their own circles.
Group discussants also spoke of an experience
regarding YouTube, a platform that cannot be as
carefully tailored:
“We had gone to watch a movie and the
actors had met us, and put a video of that
on Youtube. On that, they had interviewed
us. I saw a lot of negative comments. We
had said we liked the movie. There were
comments like: now, blind people who are
not able to see the movie are going to say
it is good, perhaps deaf people will also say
they like the movie without hearing it!!!
“There were a lot of disgusting comments.
“I think they [the moderators] deleted the
comments later.”
This experience of getting harassed online as
soon as one is exposed to a more mainstream
audience helps us understand why women with
disabilities may choose to socialize online only
in limited circles. Doing so can ensure that one’s
experience on the internet is largely positive and
pleasurable. The stigma of being disabled and
enjoying everyday activities leads to mocking
on the internet –forcing many PWD to restrict
sharing their experiences to an abled audience.
Online violence experienced
by women with disabilities
Online harassment is generally understood as
unwanted sexual conduct on digital platforms;
Online violence includes harassment, threats or
violence on somebody using technology or the
internet. With this working definition, the label
of harassment is applied to anything that is not
welcomed by the recipient, regardless of the
intention behind it. Our discussions of WWD’s
experiences 	on 	their 	own 	Facebook 	pages,
as well as online dating sites and on Youtube
have indicated the prevalence of intersectional
violence they face, targeted for their identities
as women and as PWD. Some of the violence
is 	in 	the 	form 	of 	microaggressions, where
persons with disabilities are given backhanded
compliments, expressing admiration for being
so beautiful or successful that they do not
“seem disabled.” Other aggressions take the
form of emotional labor, where WWDs are
constantly asked by abled persons to answer
their 	questions 	and 	satisfy 	their 	curiosities.
In this section, we explore the intersectional
violence faced online by WWDs, across the
scale from micro to the macro.
Social ideas about what is acceptable and one’s
own socialization can affect how/when we feel
harassed. Some of our respondents shared that
sometimes the line between appreciation and
harassment online is difficult for them to draw,

-- 35 of 46 --

PAG E 3 6 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
as seen in this participant’s quote regarding
comments on her Facebook posts:
“Mostly I get positive comments but some
men comment “sexy body” --- I don’t know
if that is good or bad.”
The viewer’s overt sexualization of one’s body
takes 	the 	appreciative 	remarks 	into 	risky
“sexual” 	territory, 	creating 	discomfort 	and
resulting in questioning whether one’s reaction
is disproportionate.
The sharing of pictures beyond the intended
receiver 	was 	another 	problem 	mentioned
during the discussions. As stated by the queer
participant quoted in the previous chapter:
“In dating sites the pictures are posted
to express sexuality so indirectly people
comment with negative intention, and some
people take a screenshot of my pictures
and send it to other people.[…… ] and
the nudes that they share may be of the
person might be of a different person.”
Another participant shared a similar experience
of feeling harassed and taking steps to protect
herself, even when she was not sure whether
the behavior she received was harassment or
not.
“Once, I went to a marriage ceremony in
a sari. My younger brother took a picture
of me showing my back, which I liked too,
so I posted it on Facebook. The photo was
not revealing too much skin, just a little bit
of the back was not covered by the blouse.
A boy commented on that photo “You are
very sexy, I want to meet you.” I felt so bad
because of that comment and I blocked
him. I don’t even know him that well.”
Both 	these 	experiences 	show 	how 	caution
and precaution are a big part of the online
lives of WWDs, in order to both nip unwanted
attention 	in 	the 	bud 	and 	also 	prevent 	the
possibility of the conversation progressing into
unwanted territory in the future.
Our discussion revealed a certain understanding
among participants that harassment online is
also inevitable. There were some anecdotes
shared of public persons who are harassed,
who then accepted that harassment would be
the price they would have to pay for their fame.
For example, one participant shared:
“We have this person.... She is a dancer.
Lots of her pictures are misused too. There
are fake pages using her pictures as well.
I informed her about it and told her to
report but she didn’t pay much attention
thinking it comes along with the popularity.
But personally, I don’t think it’s right. Maybe
she thought it was right and didn’t take any
action. So the photos are misused the most.”
Our 	participants 	were 	also 	of 	the 	opinion
that the experience of harassment is felt by
women more strongly because of their painful
awareness of their own vulnerability and that
having disabilities compounds this.
“Yeah there are a lot of cases that happen
in the community like being asked to meet
and falling victim to a rape attempt, based
on the fact that disable people cannot
stand for their own help.”
“What happens to us mostly is, among
amputees, 	is 	that 	people 	first 	try 	to
emotionally blackmail us. They know about
our bodies and the level of injuries, and
comment accordingly. For example I have
injuries 	all 	throughout. It’s 	clearly 	seen
when I am wearing stockings. They used
to ask for pictures of my stump. I did not
realize at first. People ask for pictures of
stumps the most. When we take pictures
of stumps there are chances of our private
parts being captured in the photos. Nepali
boys aren’t that much forward so they don’t
bother to ask for sure. But people from
foreign countries ask for [photos of the
stump] the most.”
These experiences point to the multiple levels
in which WWDs face harassment online. One is
the limitations imposed by a disabled body, and
the vulnerabilities it creates – where mounting
an effective self-defense in case of attack might
be very difficult.

-- 36 of 46 --

PAG E 3 7 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
Online harassment of WWDs deserves separate
examination because the type of harassment
used to target them and their own experiences
of being harassed may be different from other
demographics. In addition, subtle tactics such as
harassers online asking someone for a picture
of their disability just to ogle at their private
parts shows how alert WWDs have to be, even
when engaged in routine behaviours online that
would seem to be low-risk. Encouragingly, the
example also shows a high level of awareness of
these threats, and active self-protection taken
to avoid these risks online.
Then there are instances of randomly being
added to sex groups on Facebook, being solicited
for sex online, and receiving sexual messages,
which 	has 	created 	additional 	problems 	for
those with visual disabilities who were on the
receiving end of sexual photos but did not
know what they were receiving.
In addition, two participants in this research have
also experienced being a victim of cybercrime,
with their IDs being hacked, receiving unwanted
photos and videos, and having their photos or
videos publicized without consent.
To close this section we go to a story shared by
one of our interviewees:
“Another experience was, once a person
sent me a friend request on Facebook. He
sent me a message which I didn’t respond
to. My brother also uses my phone and my
brother replied to him saying “Hi, how are
you?” The message was from a foreigner...I
don’t remember his name now, I think his
name was Richard or something. I knew
that was a fake id. He found my number,
I don’t know from where but he called me
by using another girl. She said that you
have a parcel from Richard, UK so come
to the airport with $400. I had just started
to work and at that time I didn’t have that
much money. Even if I had that money I
wasn’t going to give it to them. And then I
said nobody is there in the UK to send me
a parcel so do not call me otherwise I will
go to the police.
“Then that person started to blackmail
me by saying he will send my pictures to
my friends and family. The photo was not
mine, it was photoshopped with my face
and someone else’s naked body. I was so
stressed, I was in my office and I talked to
my brother, and he suggested that I go to
the police and report the case. I did that;
I went to the police station in Teku, filed
a cyber crime report showing the pictures
and that fake Facebook ID.The facebook ID
was subsequently blocked but the number
that called me could not be traced - they
said the call was from India, but the girl was
speaking Nepali.This case happened about
2 years ago.
“I didn’t tell anyone except my older brother.
I didn’t even tell my mother because she
will judge me and my character. If I tell
my friends, they may think that I sent him
those kinds of pictures. It is very awkward
to talk with friend about sex and sexuality
in the context of Nepal. I can’t talk with
anyone. Only with your husband or your
sexual partner can you talk [about it] or
with the people who know a little bit about
the topic. In my case, I can’t talk with my
husband either. I used to frequently watch
porn with my husband. Actually, he taught
me to watch porn. But when we divorced, he
blamed me, saying that I am a characterless
girl who watches porn.”
In this story we can see a perfect storm where
online harassment, the technological aspect of
the crime (modifying and superimposing images),
fraud, 	impersonation, 	moralistic 	attitudes
towards women’s sexuality and the sexuality of
women with disabilities all come together.
While this snapshot provides us with a bleak
look into all the challenges that women with
disabilities have to face today in the online
world, we end our analysis on a hopeful note in
the next section.

-- 37 of 46 --

PAG E 3 8 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
Life without the
internet will be dull
For a final word on the Internet, we present this
snippet from an activist who is based at home:
“I am disabled and my family and friends
don’t allow me to go out of my house as
they want to keep me ‘safe’ from outside or
they don’t want me to work. I can’t imagine
my life without the internet. My life will be
dull.”
Connections and mobility via the internet has
been beneficial for PWDs.The barriers to access,
and the exclusion and the violence prevalent
in offline spaces need further exploration to
make the internet a space where women with
disabilities can thrive.

-- 38 of 46 --

Recommendations
for a dignified life
online

-- 39 of 46 --

PAG E 4 0 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR A
DIGNIFIED LIFE ONLINE
43 	Dahal.T. et. al.(2016) Freedom of Expression on Internet in Nepal. Freedom Forum. https://ifex.org/
images/nepal/2016/08/05/nepal_freedom_expression_internet_freedomforum.pdf
44 	(2019). Policy Paper: Information Technology Bill 2019, from a feminist lens. Body and Data.
https://files.bodyanddata.org/nextcloud/index.php/s/WCRo3DL6XcBGLiJ
45 	The Privacy Act2018. s. 6 (Nep).
Section 6 of the Privacy Act mentions that if someone is of ‘unsound mind’, the matter relating to
reproductive health and pregnancy of can be provided to the member of his or her undivided family
and for his or her guardian. This is direct violation of right to privacy of individual and does not respect
autonomy of individual to understand their bodies and make decision about it, so should be amended.
The term ‘unsound mind’ itself is ableist and could be interpreted to further marginalize women with
intellectual and psycho-social disabilities.
One of our participants shared how the Internet
could be a positive asset in helping improve the
lives of women with disabilities:
“For a person with a disability to live a dignified
and normal life, everything, such as – education,
employment, 	relationship, 	children 	etc. 	is
needed. And, social media and the internet
should make it seem like a normal thing. The
Internet should make the abled people feel
that it’s normal for PWD to live a life like abled
people. If a wheelchair woman marries and has
children, people think like – “Does she need a
marriage? Does she need children?” And, if a
blind girl marries and gives birth to the children,
people say the things like – why do they have
to give birth to children even when they are
blind etc. People react strangely and awkwardly.
So, I hope after ten years, we would see some
changes. I hope abled people would feel totally
normal about PWD getting married, having
children etc. And, I think that the internet and
social media should help us in this regard.”
Based on our research, these recommendations
are in the interest of promoting freedom of
sexual expression for women and queer people
with disabilities online:
Recommendations for the
government and its institutions
The 	national 	policies 	infringe 	on 	freedom
of 	expression 	and 	often 	criminalise 	sexual
expression, limiting and controlling how people
express their opinions and desires.The Electronic
Transaction Act43 and Information Technology
Bill44 restricts one’s sexual expression online.
Besides the national regulations and laws, there
is moral policing from the local governments on
citizens, especially on women and girls. Similarly,
national policies that are unfriendly to PWDs
by being abelist and heteronormative in their
design, including the Chapter on Family Law
in Civil Code (Muluki Aparadh Ain) 2017 and
Privacy Act 2019 puts women with disabilities
at 	further 	risk 	of 	marginalisation45. These
laws and regulations that restrict freedom of
expression and sexual expression of citizens,
and curb PWDs from enjoying their human
rights require amendment.
Many PWDs rely on online spaces and digital
technology to access information, services and
community 	that 	are 	otherwise 	inaccessible
to them. However the cost of devices and
internet connectivity is still high and there are
only limited concessions from the state. The
current provisions from the government, with
subsidies on using the internet for those with
hearing impairments is commendable. However
this framework could be expanded. The PWD
community will benefit from affordable devices

-- 40 of 46 --

PAG E 4 1 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
and discounted internet plans. PWDs should not
be only seen as beneficiaries to these services
but 	also 	key 	stakeholders 	in 	consultations
to develop national policies around ICT and
strategies.
Recommendations for the
disability community
The way that needs of PWD are identified is
not inclusive of people from different walks
of life, and is mostly led by Brahmin cisgender
heterosexual 	individuals. This 	results 	in 	a
hierarchy of needs where aspects of sexuality are
not considered as ‘basic needs’, thus excluding
the voice of many in the community.The agenda
setting of disability rights movement needs to
be inclusive of women and queer people with
disability across caste, ethnicity, class, education,
geographical location, and age. Persons with
severe disability tend to be excluded from
disability rights discourse; greater effort must
be applied to include them as well. Narratives
around what are seen as ‘good’ or ‘bad’ use
of the internet and online spaces need to be
restructured to hold the nuances and messiness
of one’s expression in online spaces. The risk to
just one person speaking up on issues of sexuality
can be overcome by a concerted campaign
where 	everyone 	participates, 	thus 	bringing
attention to the problem, while distributing the
risk and ensuring that the negative attention
can be dealt with as a community, rather than
individually.
The 	self-censorship 	among 	activists 	with
disabilities due to the pressure to perform
as 	a 	role 	model 	to 	the 	community 	needs
reassessment; their individual right to freedom
of expression needs to be addressed. Sexuality
of women and queer people with disabilities
should be acknowledged as a priority of the
movement, so they feel accepted fully, besides
just their ‘activist side’.
While the community does support each other
when harassed, they do not have any forum for
ongoing discussions on issues of disability and
sexuality, and in the lack of such a safe space,
they are limited to having these discussions only
when they are invited to international forums.
Recommendations for
technologists and developers
Access to technology and the internet is key and
a first step for someone to be able to express
themselves freely and openly. However, digital
technologies are often not friendly to PWDs
in their functions and/or interface and access
to these technologies to PWDs comes as an
afterthought. Not all social media platforms and
their content are accessible to PWD. Even the
technology projects developed to assist PWDs
usually collect suggestions and feedback once
they are ready (rather than seeking during earlier
design stages). PWDs are also often expected to
provide this constructive review and feedback
without 	any 	compensation. To 	make 	digital
technology accessible to PWDs whether it is
directly catered to them or not, there must be
meaningful participation and consultation with
the community from inception of the project
until its execution. Such a practice of seeking
suggestions from the community regularly will
only improve the quality and inclusivity of the
product.
Recommendations for
the wider community
Society at large needs to bear accountability for
how conversations about disability and sexuality
take place. Looking at women and queer people
with disabilities beyond the objects of pity and
needing support, society needs to make their
stories of resistance more visible, and respect
their agency. Conversations around disability
and sexuality can broaden the range of futures
that a woman with disability is able to imagine for
herself, whether that future includes marriage,
a family, and sexual pleasure, or not. Safe and
open spaces must be created where these
conversations can take place free of judgment.
There is also an urgent need for more academic
research into the disability community in Nepal,
with a focus on women and queer persons
within the community. Existing research as well
as new knowledge production on this should be
widely distributed in accessible formats.

-- 41 of 46 --

PAG E 4 2 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
Recommendations for
other movements
For 	intersectional 	movement 	building, 	the
queer 	rights 	movement, the 	women 	rights
movement and sexual rights initiatives need to
intersect disability in their work and activities.
As our research shows, even among activists,
open conversations on sexuality do not happen.
Mainstream judgments continue to view sexual
expressions of women as unacceptable. Ideas of
sexuality are still narrow, and limit discussion.
Initiatives 	that 	expand 	the 	definition 	and
understanding of sexuality in Nepal are necessary.
Addressing issues of online privacy, consent and
security within the discourse of sexuality is
equally important. Participants’ understanding
of privacy, consent and data protection is low,
with self reported instances of activists violating
the right to privacy of others by posting things
without 	their 	consent. It 	is 	important 	that
activist women with disabilities be supported
with training to understand these concepts and
apply them within their communities.

-- 42 of 46 --

PAG E 43 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
APPENDIX
FGD guiding questions
1. 	Can you introduce yourselves?
2. 	Do you use multimedia phones? And do you have internet on it? Do you have
internet facility where you live?
3. 	Have you been using any government facility in terms of using internet and other
services?
4. 	Do you use any specific apps in relation to your disability? (apps for visually
impaired people) Do you find it easy to use?
5. 	Do you use social media channel (Facebok / Twitter/ Insta or others? Any difference
in using certain social media for certain purpose? What do you use most/? What do
you prefer using?
6. 	How much of information you share about yourselves in those platforms (photos,
feelings and emotions/information, etc.)?
7. 	What kind of comments or reaction do you get in social media on your posts and
how do you react about it?
8. 	What kind of content in social media do you consider are related to sexuality? Do
you post such content?
9. 	Have you ever faced any kind of abusive comments expression related to your
sexuality? Do you get comments related to your disability)?
10. Have you heard of dating apps? Do you or your peers use them? What has been
your experience?
11. How do you see role of internet to explore and express sexuality?
12. Do you use any platforms to express your sexuality and for pleasure (watching
porn/ making tactic/watching tiktok)?
13. Do you engages in conversation about bodies and sexuality online? How?
14. What kind of bodies do you see being represented online? What kinds of
conversations do you see happening online about bodies? What do you think about
them?
15. Do you think in people are bias or are abusive towards the PWD in the internet?
What kind of biasness you have faced/seen?
16. Do you censor yourself because of possible threats, negative comments and
violence online?
17. Have you used any measures to counter the abusive comments and violence online?
(argue with the people online, report the post or comments, delete, report to
police, etc.)
18. Has internet help you to find support through friends, networks, and website?

-- 43 of 46 --

PAG E 4 4 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
Interview schedule
Beyond Access:Women and queer persons with disabilities expressing self and exploring
sexuality online
General Information
Name
Age
Caste
Ethnicity
Occupation
Gender/ sexual orientation
Marital status
Accessibility
1. 	Do you use internet or not? If yes, where do you use internet and in what device?
2. 	How supportive these devices and the internet platforms are to navigate your day-
to-day lives?
3. 	What are online platforms and applications you mostly use? Are there any access
issues?
4. 	What are the challenges using these platforms? Do you use any specific apps or
program based on your disability needs?
5. 	Are you benefiting from any government policy and plans in relation to telephone
or internet access and use?
6. 	Has anybody (policy makers or technology companies) come to you to discuss/
consult about your need and experiences in terms of internet/technology and
accessibility?
Expression/platforms and experience
• 	How often do you share your personal information (photos, opinions) online?
• 	What kind of platforms do you use to share your thoughts? What kind of platforms
do you use to express your sexuality?
• 	What kind of platforms/ websites do you use for information collection related to
sexual health and sexuality?
• 	What kind of bodies do you mostly see in the internet? How are disabled bodies
shown and perceived?
Experience online
1. 	Have you faced any online abuses and appreciation? What was your experience?
2. 	Have you seen any kind of online abuse being faced by peers from disability

-- 44 of 46 --

PAG E 4 5 | B E YO N D ACCE SS
community?
3. 	Have you faced any online abuse or appreciation because of your expression related
to your sexuality? Share any experience.
4. 	What kind of comments do you get when you post certain kind of (feeling, thought,
photos, etc) content?
5. 	Do you censor yourself because of possible threats and violence online?
6. 	What kind of measures do you apply to counter violence you face online? (Argue
with the people online, report the post or comments, delete, report to police, etc.)
Sexual expression in online platforms
1. 	Nepal government has banned pornography saying that it is source of violence on
women and children, what do you think about it?
2. 	Do you use any platforms to express your sexuality and for pleasure (watching
porn/ making tiktok/watching tiktok, using dating apps)?
3. 	If you have an intimate partner, how do they react to your expression online, like
when you share photo online? Would it be different if you were a single person?
Movement building/Community building
1. 	How has the internet been useful for movement building, has it contributed to
Nepal’s disability movement?

-- 45 of 46 --

Beyond Access:
Women and queer persons with disabilities
expressing self and exploring sexuality online
Body & Data is a digital rights organization in Nepal that
aims to increase women and queer persons’ engagement in
digital spaces through suitable strategies for
expression, autonomy and agency.
bodyanddata.org

-- 46 of 46 --

