Relevant to
Online Violence
in Nepal
Mapping
Laws
A report by Body & Data
2021

-- 1 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 2
Mapping Laws relevant to online violence in Nepal: A study
Body & Data, 2021
Authors: Shubha Kayastha, Rita Baramu
Editing and design: Supriya Manandhar
Published by: Body & Data
Supported by: Vision for Change
All rights reserved Body & Data

-- 2 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 3
Contents
Acronyms 	4
Acknowledgments 	5
Summary 	6
Introduction 	9
Background of the study 	9
Objectives of the research 	11
Scope and methodology 	11
Freedom of Expression 	14
Legal measures and analysis 	16
Conclusion 	18
Case Study 	20
Privacy 	22
Legal measures and analysis 	23
Conclusion 	26
Case Study 	27
Freedom from Violence 	29
Legal Measures and analysis 	30
Conclusion 	32
Case studies 	34
Conclusion 	36
Problems within the existing justice system 	37
Analysis of reviewed cases 	39
Recommendations 	41
Annex 	42
Data analysis of cases collected 	42
Law Analysis 	44
Domestic Violence (Crime and Punishment) Act, 2066 (2009) 	44
The Sexual Harassment at Workplace Prevention Act, 2015 (2071) 	45
Electronic Transaction Act, 2063 (2007) 	46
Policy Mapping Chart 	47

-- 3 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 4
Acronyms
CEDAW 	Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
ETA 	Electronic Transaction Act
FOE 	Freedom Of Expression
HRC 	Human Rights Council
ICCPR 	International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
ICT 	Information and Communication Technology
LGBTIQ 	Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Intersex Queer
NDHS 	Nepal Demographic and Health Survey
UDHR 	Universal Declaration of Human Rights
UNGA 	United Nations General Assembly

-- 4 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 5
Acknowledgments
This research has been put together with work and support of many individuals and
we would like to acknowledge everyone involved. Firstly, the key informants, including
lawyers and government attorneys and activists who were interviewed and responded
to our queries regarding laws that govern digital platforms and online gender based
violence. Our thanks go to Jevina Pradhan and Sukirti Manandhar who first initiated the
desk study and data collection process in 2019 and Rita Baramu who took over the data
analysis and compilation for the report after Jevina and Sukriti. Our acknowledgement
also goes to Supriya Manandhar for her input in framing, editing and layout of the reports
and the chart “Mapping laws related to online gender based violence in Nepal”. We would
also like to thank Dikshya Khadgi for the in citation works including each and every one
who was directly or indirectly involved in the research process.
Shubha Kayastha

-- 5 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 6
Summary
The Internet and technology have provided people with various opportunities in their
personal and public spaces. However there are also many instances of their design having
enabled structural violence against women and marginalized communities online.
Such online violence against women and marginalized communities stems from pre-
existing socio-cultural factors offline. This online violence affects people across caste,
class, profession, geography, disability status, gender identity and sexuality. Due to the
nature of ICT infrastructure and how it functions in terms of physicality, anonymity or
intractability, etc, it has particular effects and consequences on the lives of the victims
and survivors1. For example, online violence can affect women’s psychological, mental
and even economic well-being, bringing with it a sense of isolation, distress, depression
and difficulties in their relationships and personal lives.2 Denying women the right to
express, the right to privacy and the right to a dignified life is a violation of their human
rights. It is also denial of their autonomy, agency and human existence. To fully address
such violence, we have to look at entrenched heteronormative patriarchy in our society,
its functions and harms and seek structural changes for the system.
Laws and policies related to the internet, technology and online gender based violence
would also be instrumental in regulating and addressing such issues. Body & Data has
analyzed Nepal’s existing laws surrounding online gender based violence to assess their
sufficiency/effectiveness in addressing the issue. We have analyzed these laws from the
1 	Maskey, J. & Karmacharya, S. (2018).
Online Violence Against Women. Loom https://taannepal.org.np/wp-
content/uploads/2020/09/Online-Violence-Against-Women-2018.pdf
2 	Kee, J. S. (2017, August 20). End Violence: Women’s rights and safety online.
Association for Progressive
Communication. https://www.apc.org/en/project/end-violence-womens-rights-and-safety-online

-- 6 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 7
perspective of digital rights3 with a focus on gender and sexuality. We have also explored
how the laws could impact or benefit women and other marginalized communities
when they face online violence. We have used freedom of expression, right to privacy
and the right to be free from violence as three human rights lenses to put these laws
into a framework of study. We conclude with some recommendations for concerned
stakeholders in order to make the implementation of these laws more effective.
3 	For the purpose of this research: “Digital rights’’ describe human rights—established by the UDHR, UN
resolutions, international conventions, regional charters, domestic law, and human rights case law—as they
are invoked in digitally networked spaces. Those spaces may be physically constructed, as in the creation of
infrastructure, protocols, and devices. Or, they may be virtually constructed, as in the creation of online identities
and communities and other forms of expression, as well as the agency exercised over that expression, for example,
management of personally identifiable data, pseudonymity, anonymity, and encryption. Such spaces include but
aren’t necessarily limited to the Internet and mobile networks and related devices and practices.’’ (Source: APC,
Unshackling Expression……)

-- 7 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 8

-- 8 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 9
Introduction
4 	WOREC. (2001, November 30). Violence Against Women Campaign. https://www.worecnepal.org/camp/1
5 	Crime Investigation Department.
Women, Children and Senior Citizen Directorate. Retrieved from https://
cid.nepalpolice.gov.np/index.php/cid-wings/women-children-service-directorate
Background of the study
The patriarchal construct of our families, society
and state subjugates women and minorities
and limits their rights and freedom. 4 The rigid
hierarchies and systemic discrimination of such
systems compromise the fundamental rights of
women and minorities. This structural inequality
is generally further perpetuated as the norm,
which in turn harms the quest for a fairer society.
According to the Nepal Demographic and Health
Survey (NDHS) 2011, 21 percent of women
between the ages of 15-48 had experienced
physical violence at least once since age 15, and
20 percent of the same sample had experienced
sexual violence at least once in their lifetime. Data
from Nepal Police Crime Investigation Bureau5
shows that a total 2144 cases of rape, 687 rape
attempts, 34 cases of witch-craft accusations,
and 11738 cases of domestic violence were
registered during the fiscal year 2076/77. These
registered cases (which include cases related to
abuse of children) are limited cases of physical
harm and do not cover other forms of violence
such as psychological, emotional abuse that
women and minorities often have to face within
their households. The bureaucracy, lawmakers,
and even the public themselves tend to have a
very narrow understanding of violence that only
concerns extreme physical violence.
“If we see court practice, they have only provided
the minimum punishment in online harassment
cases no matter how grievous the crime is. The
maximum punishment so far must be around one
year only.” (Government Attorney)
Despite the statistics, we still need to consider
that even the numbers only represent a small
sample; most physical violence goes unreported
or they are suppressed or condoned within the
family or society. Non-physical forms of violence
have an even greater chance of being ignored,
because people have a tendency of perceiving
violence as serious only when there is evidence
of physical harm. Physical violence is but the
tip of the iceberg within a framework of socio-
cultural and psychological violence.
We can take online violence as an extension

-- 9 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 10
of offline violence into digital platforms.6 The
mainstream understanding of the violence that
takes place in online spaces echoes the general
trivializing of non-physical forms of harm. There
is a social normalization of the assumption
that 	women 	and 	marginalized 	communities
expressing themselves in virtual spaces entails
receiving online abuse and harassment, that this
is something of an “occupational hazard”. Often,
those in positions of authority prescribe reductive
solutions 	along 	the 	lines 	of 	victims 	simply
restraining themselves from the internet. Within
such a subjugated status, women are expected
to not have opinions and express themselves
openly. And if, by any chance, they go against
this customary expectation, they are silenced
or threatened, offline or online. Our culture of
silence further curtails women’s freedom to
express, whether it be a political opinion or their
sexual expression. Women and marginalized
groups, especially queer individuals, are targeted
online simply because of their expression.
In 	general, 	women 	and 	marginalized
communities are denied the right to access,
privacy, and to participate in digital governance 7
.
Women and marginalized groups are under-
represented 	throughout 	governance 	system
from civil administration, to media, industries,
academia and so on. The sharp divide between
those in power and those left behind is reflected
within digital governance as well.
6 	Maskey, J., & Karmacharya, S. (2018). Online violence against women: a continuum of offline discrimination.
LOOM.
7 	Nepal, I., Maskey, J., & Karmacharya, S. (2017). Exploring the use of the internet among gender equality and
sexual right advocates in Nepal : Erotics South Asia exploratory research.
APC
8 	Grewal, I., (1999). ‘Women’s rights as human rights’: Feminist practices,global feminism, and human rights
regimes in transnationality ,
Citizenship Studies, 3:3, 337-354, https://doi.org/10.1080/13621029908420719
9 	Grewal, I., (1999). ‘Women’s rights as human rights’: Feminist practices,global feminism, and human rights
regimes in transnationality ,
Citizenship Studies, 3:3, 337-354, https://doi.org/10.1080/13621029908420719
The international community has universalized
treaties such as the UDHR and CEDAW in order to
secure the rights of all, including the marginalized.
Nepal is also a signatory to these treaties. These
treaties are globally accepted and recognized,
and used as a reference point to advocate for
human 	rights, 	especially 	where 	the 	national
laws themselves may be regressive. However,
these frameworks themselves are also not above
question when it comes to protecting the human
rights of women or marginalized communities.
The law-making process is influenced by the
framework 	of 	nation-states 	(itself 	a 	loaded
concept, often built on exclusionary principles)
and ensuing geo-politics. And where they are to
be implemented, the country’s own nationalism,
gender politics and geo-political context can
create 	further 	hurdles.8 	The 	universalization
of rights also means that the laws see people
as a homogeneous group. And when such laws
are 	made 	for 	women, 	they 	might 	not 	take
intersectionalities 	of 	class, 	gender, 	religion,
nationality, 	race 	and 	sexuality 	into 	account.
Whereas in reality, violence against women is
contextual to social, economic, state, political
and cultural formation.9
Violation of privacy is another part of gender
based violence. The UN Special 	Rapporteur
on violence against women, its causes and
consequences emphasizes this aspect:
“In 2016, the General Assembly, in its resolution

-- 10 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 11
71/199, recognized that women were particularly
affected by violations of the right to privacy in the
digital age, and called upon all States to further
develop preventive measures and remedies. In
2017, the Human Rights Council, in its resolution
34/7, reaffirmed this call, noting that abuses of
the right to privacy in the digital age may affect
all individuals, including with particular effects
on women, as well as children and persons in
vulnerable situations, or marginalized groups.” 10
The human rights frameworks need reexamining
in terms of the lived experiences of women and
the marginalized communities who have been
affected by violations to their privacy. If we look
into the generally used “public” and “private”
dichotomy 	of 	society, 	domestic 	violence 	is
viewed as a “private matter”, and therefore less
receiving of police or institutional intervention.
10 	UN Human Rights Council. (2018). Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes
and consequences on online violence against women and girls from human rights perspectives.
11 	Privacy International. (November, 2018). From Oppression to Liberation: Reclaiming the Right to Privacy.
Privacy International. https://privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/2018-11/From%20oppression%20to%20
liberation-reclaiming%20the%20right%20to%20privacy.pdf
12 	UN Human Rights Council. (2018). Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes
and consequences on online violence against women and girls from human rights perspectives.
Which 	implies 	that 	women’s 	reasonable
expectations of privacy are often infringed upon
differently than those of men. Their privacy
is often controlled and taken as a right of men
instead.11
There are also many forms of online gender based
violence such as publication of intimate pictures
without consent, or photoshopping of images,
in order to shame or humiliate women and girls.
These would constitute a violation of their right
to dignity and freedom from violence 12
. All these
gender based privacy breaches are products
of systemic violence and inequality that denies
women and minorities their fundamental rights.
The right to privacy, the right to expression and
freedom from violence are all interconnected to
each other, as violation of one right affects the
others.
Objectives of the research
• 	To identify the legal frameworks in Nepal that can be used to respond to online
violence against women and queers.
• 	To analyze cases of online violence and harassment that women and minorities have
experienced.
• 	To map relevant laws within the scope of digital rights , arranged into the framework
of privacy, freedom of expression and living free of violence.
• 	To prepare an assistive documentation for women’s rights groups in the country to
understand the intersection of VAW and online violence.

-- 11 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 12
Scope and methodology
For the purpose of this exploratory research, selected national laws and policies were
reviewed and analyzed through a gender lens (as women and queer persons’ experiences of
fighting for justice against gender based violence is different from men’s). The laws that we
reviewed are:
Electronic Transaction Act (2007),
Information Technology Bill (2018),
[WU1] Civil Code of Nepal (2018),
The Sexual Harassment at Workplace Prevention Act (2071),
Individual Privacy Bill (2018) and
Domestic Violence (Crime and Punishment) Act (2009).
As part of the data collection, we conducted
four key informant interviews among attorneys
within and outside of the government bodies
and with Cyber Crime Unit of Nepal Police in
May- June 2018. Similarly, we also collected
and reviewed 15 legal cases related to online or
technology related violence courts and offices of
government attorneys along with testimonies,
such as reports, evidences, statements, hearings
from the court. Out of the reviewed 15 cases, 8
had hearings while the rest were pending. Our
review included identifying of the type(s) of
online violence within cyber crime, the list of
evidence mentioned in the case file or attached,
the relationship between the perpetrator and
the victim, and the decision from the court (if
available).
We analyzed the language concerning women’s
bodies in the policy documents and the hearings/
decisions from a feminist lens to understand
how 	state 	authority 	perceives 	violence
against women. Generally the court punished
perpetrators not for violating women’s right
to privacy or self-autonomy, but for violating a
patriarchal notion of ‘honor’ as prescribed by
society, which even the court associates with
women’s 	bodies 	and 	sexuality. Our 	analysis
also sheds light on how women’s worth is often
limited to their sexuality, and women are seen as
‘victims’ whose value and dignity need protection
from the law.
We also referenced documents from international
treaties and conventions in writing this report. We
critically examined the treaties and conventions
from a feminist lens and also compared with
national laws in order to gauge how the national
laws have included the international framework
of 	human 	rights 	(specifically 	the 	right 	to
expression, privacy and free from violence). The
notes from the key informant interviews were
helpful in analyzing how concerned individuals
took on a protectionist lens in matters of online
gender based violence as well.
We’ve 	ordered 	the 	discussion 	on 	laws 	and
policies based on their time of emergence and
significance within relevant issues of digital
rights. Also interspersed through the report
are case analyses key informant remarks. Each
chapter on the three human rights frameworks
are concluded along thematic areas drawn from
the analysis itself. We conclude the report with
recommendations for stakeholders.

-- 12 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 13

-- 13 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 14
Freedom of Expression
13 	United Nations Human Rights Council (2016) Report of the Special Rappouter on the promotion and
protection of freedom of opinion and expression. United Nations General Assembly. https://www.undocs.
org/A/71/373
14 	Sigdel.S, Aryal.T.R. & Maharajan. R. (2001). Freedom of Expression on the Internet in Nepal. Internet Society
Nepal. https://internetsociety.org.np/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/FoE-on-Internet_Publication.pdf
15 	United Nations Human Rights Council (2016) Report of the Special Rappouter on the promotion and
protection of freedom of opinion and expression. United Nations General Assembly https://www.undocs.
org/A/71/373
Individuals being able to express their opinions
without fear of retribution is vital in establishing
democracy, human rights, liberty and good
governance. The United Nations Human Rights
Council (HRC) and the General Assembly (GA)
have recognized freedom of expression as one
of the essential foundations of a democratic
society. They also emphasize the importance of
free media to build inclusive knowledge societies
and 	democracies 	and 	foster 	intercultural
dialogue, peace and good governance.13
In today’s digital era, the internet has become
an important space to exercise one’s right to
freedom of expression and is tied to the right
to 	information 	and 	right 	to 	assembly 	and
association, as guaranteed by the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR). People are using social media
and online platforms to share their opinions, all
the more valuable in contexts where they are
underrepresented in 	mainstream 	media and
publication.
Alongside this profusion of internet-usage, we
see states introducing policies to regulate the
internet and its content. These laws are brought
in place with the expressed intent to safeguard
the rights of individuals online and to protect
the national integrity and security of the state.
However, many of these regulations have also
been 	restricting, 	controlling, 	manipulating
and censoring content disseminated through
the internet without prior public debate, often
using broad and ambiguous laws. 14 There have
been many incidents where governments have
disrupted the internet and telecommunications
services and detained online journalists and
bloggers in the name of national security or
public order. 15 In 2019, there were a total record
of 95 internet shutdowns in India for several

-- 14 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 15
political reasons, including attempts by the
government 	to 	silence 	the 	citizen’s 	voices
against the Citizen’s Amendment Bill.16 Asides
from India, governments of Bangladesh, Congo,
Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Sudan, Myanmar,
and Zimbabwe also shut down the internet
under the pretext of public safety or preventing
the spreading of misinformation.17
The United Nations report on the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression has also expressed concern regarding
the increasing number of incidents curtailing
freedom of expression across countries. The
report highlighted that policies and laws against
terrorism and other criminal activity are being
used to undermine the media, critical voices,
and activists. Such measures pose a threat to an
open and secure internet.
Freedom Forum Nepal (an organization working
for press freedom) has listed a total 104 cases of
press freedom violations that took place during
April 2018 - 2019. 18 Similarly, 106 cases were
recorded in the cyber crime unit in Kathmandu
for their “improper social media posts” under the
Electronic Transaction Act (ETA) 2008.19 Going
16 	Nazmi,S. (2019, December 19).
Why India shuts down the Internet more than any other Democracy? BBC.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-50819905
17 	Human Rights Watch. (2020). Shutting down the internet to shut down critics.
World Report 2020. https://
www.hrw.org/world-report/2020/country-chapters/global-5
18 	Freedom Forum. (2019)
Regressive laws, Mounting Violations. http://freedomforum.org.np/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/May-3-Report-2019.pdf
19	
Nepal Government’s new Information Technology bill draws battle lines against free speech. The Kathmandu
post, 	Feb.15,2019. 	https://kathmandupost.com/national/2019/02/15/nepal-governments-new-information-
technology-bill-draws-battle-lines-against-free-speech
20 	Sigdel, S et al. (2018). Freedom Of Expression on the Internet in Nepal. Internet Society Nepal, 2018, pp. 23.
21 	Incident Reports. (2016). Newspaper editor arrested.
Nepal Monitor. https://nepalmonitor.org/reports/
view/12356
22 	Freedom Forum. (2020, May 14).
Police arrested citizen for sharing image on facebook. http://
nepalpressfreedom.org/main/issue-single/1174
23 	Freedom Forum (2020, April 29).
Rita Rijal: A student leader arrested for writing in social media under cyber
crime. http://nepalpressfreedom.org/main/issue-single/1165
further back, Nepal has had a history of the state
sporadically blocking or filtering the Internet
without 	a 	transparent 	mechanism, 	whether
during the 2005 royal coup, during the 1996-
2006 civil war, or the 2010 government order
against explicit content. 20
In 	contemporary 	times, 	the 	ETA 	has 	been
frequently 	used 	to 	curb 	dissenting 	voices
online. Arjun Thapaliya, editor of the Anukalpa
newspaper, was arrested without a warrant for a
comment on facebook . He was arrested under
the ETA’s provisions.21 more recently, Toranraj
Poudel was arrested on May 14th, 2020, for
posting morphed photographs of politicians on
his Facebook page, including that of the Prime
Minister. 22 He was accused of disturbing public
morality and spreading a hoax on social media,
and charged under the same act. Earlier, on
28th April, 2020, Rita Rijal, a student leader, was
arrested under the charge of cybercrime. 23 She
had written a Facebook post against a former
police officer referring to his alleged kidnapping
of a parliament member, a matter which had
widely been in public discussion at the time.
Asides from conflicts regarding national and

-- 15 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 16
partisan 	politics 	(e.g. 	citizens 	versus 	state
authorities), 	other 	forms 	of 	expression 	are
also targeted. In this analysis, it’s important to
consider that freedom of expression must be
observed through an intersectional lens; the
expressions of minorities tend to come under the
most scrutiny and attack. And within this, sexual
expression 	remains 	an 	important 	dimension
that state and non-state actors have sought
to control. Feminist and queer expressions,
or sexual expressions of marginalized groups
such as sex workers and LGBTIQ communities
24 	Constitution of Nepal. 2015. http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/nep155698b.pdf
are surveilled, regulated and restricted. Nepal
banned pornography in 2018 and this can be
taken as an example where the state, under the
pretext of mitigating sexual violence among
girls and women, curbed access to free and open
internet. Such restrictions are linked to larger
questions of moral policing, censorship, and
unequal citizenship and rights.
The following sections will discuss how Nepal’s
legal provisions address freedom of expression,
sexual 	expression 	of 	individuals, 	and 	online
gender based violence.
Legal measures and analysis
Constitution
The constitution of Nepal provides the right
to freedom of expression and opinion as a
fundamental right under article 17 (2) (a). Article
19 of the Constitution also guarantees freedom
of expression for the press, publication and
broadcasting. The constitution goes on to state
that no publication and broadcasting or printing
of any news items, articles, editorials or other
reading materials or audio visual materials shall
be subjected to censorship. 24
However, the constitution also places restrictions
on FoE, generally in the name of protecting
national interests.
Electronic Transaction Act
(ETA)
The Electronic Transaction Act 2008, Article 47
(1) prohibits the publication or display of any
materials through a computer or the internet that
“is contrary to public morality or decency” and
“social harmony” or “spreads hate and jealousy”.
It also tends to criminalize online expressions
under stated pretext of deterring harm to “social
harmony”. This act follows a blanket approach to
address online violence and does not consider
the question of individual’s own consent in
producing sexual/ erotic content, and therefore
the clauses around “obscenity” may be used to
curtail sexual expression regardless of consent.
Criminal Code
The Criminal Code chapter on crime against public
benefit, health, security, facility and morality
of country section 121 restricts the production,
sale, publication, promotion (through electronic
medium), purchase, rent, display, advertising or
keeping of “obscene” books and brochures that
promote immorality and eroticism. This provision
does not take into account the possibility of
consent among individuals undertaking such an
exchange and thus can potentially criminalize

-- 16 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 17
self expression and sexual expressions.
Section 293 of the criminal code prohibits the
listening to or recording other’s conversations
without 	the 	permission 	of 	a 	“competent
authority” or consent of involved persons, unless
for any publicly made statement. Section 294 of
the code prohibits disclosing private information
without 	permission, 	including 	private
information on public figures, unless compelled
by law. While these two provisions acknowledge
consent, they still have the potential to restrict
FoE, and especially press freedom.
Section 306 criminalizes defamation through
any medium that harms the reputation of a living
or deceased person or hurts the feelings of their
family/relatives. However, exceptions are made
for: any expression supported with evidence,
or done for public good, done to “caution the
concerned person”, or to criticize those with
authority, or as part of an investigation. While
this 	provision 	provides 	leeway 	for 	certain
expressions, the clauses are vague and have the
potential to criminalize legitimate expression,
including sexual expression on the internet.
Section 122 restricts showing of private parts,
or acting ‘obscenely’ or talking ‘vulgar’ things
in public. The ambiguity of the words such as
‘obscene’ and ‘vulgar’ is generally extended
to erotic content or material that has sexual
connotations. This provision may still curtail
freedom of sexual expression. Authorities can
use these for moral policing both online and
offline. Furthermore, surveillance of individuals in
order to identify such behavior compromises the
privacy of people, and this can adversely affect
communities such as sex workers, transgender
individuals, young girls and women.
Individual Privacy Act
Article 	15.2 	of 	Individual 	Privacy 	Act 	2018
prohibits making any comments on the character
of any person except when it is legally required
to make inquiries on their character, conduct or
behavior. This provision may be used to address
forms of violence online such as slut-shaming
and harassment of women and marginalized
communities. 	However, 	“character” 	is 	a
vague term and has gendered and political
connotations. There is potential for this provision
to be misused, especially in circumstances where
the person criticized has state authority.
Information Technology (IT)
Bill
There are several provisions proposed under the
Information Technology (IT) Bill 2019 that are
concerned with online violence and freedom of
expression. Article 83 of the IT bill prohibits cyber
bullying and defines it as “continually harassing,
teasing, demeaning, discouraging, insulting, or
scolding” someone. However it is unclear what
frame of time constitutes “continually”.
Article 	86 	of 	the 	bill 	prohibits 	production,
collection, distribution, publication, exhibition,
transmission 	or 	purchase 	of 	pornographic
materials using any electronic system. Article 87
of the bill prohibits anyone from using electronic
medium to establish online relation with an
intention 	of 	sexually 	exploiting 	or 	carrying
out illegal activities. Within these provisions,
the consent of the concerned persons is not
acknowledged, 	leading 	to 	the 	possibility 	of
consensual activity also being prosecuted. Sex
workers also stand to be heavily affected by this
bill.

-- 17 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 18
Article 88 (1) & (2) prohibits the use of electronic
media in attacking Nepal’s sovereignty and
national unity, bringing communal disharmony,
inciting discrimination, or acting against public
conduct and morality.
Article 91 of the same bill mentions banning
social network sites if they are not registered
at the Department of Information Technology.
Article 92 then goes on to make provisions
for the arbitrary removal of content on social
sites by the Department of Information and
Technology on the basis of expansive terms such
as “offensive content”.
These 	provisions 	give 	sweeping 	powers 	to
authorities.
Conclusion
The state’s policies to regulate online platforms
have the potential to curb individual’s rights in
digital spaces, although the policies are often
made with the expressed intent to safeguard
those rights in the first place. Online rights may
be infringed in the following major areas:
Ambiguity in the law
The various legal restrictions on FoE in the name
of public morality, indecency, obscenity, public
conduct, etc are vague in meaning. These terms
are very subjective and open to interpretation.
The articles where these terms are used do
not clearly define them. This ambiguity leaves
room for those in power to define them as fits
their interests, posing a risk to individual’s free
expressions.
It is important to note here that some types
of information may be legitimately restricted
such as: child pornography, defamation, direct
and public incitement to commit genocide and
advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred
that constitutes incitement to discrimination,
hostility or violence. However, the terms used
in the articles are not explicitly defined as such,
because of which there is risk of this law being
abused to criminalize legitimate expressions.
Giving legitimacy to restrictions
on expression
The articles described in the previous section
open up the possibility of limiting and controlling
the 	right 	to 	express. These 	restrictions 	are
applied to acts which are often vaguely described
as undermining sovereignty, territorial integrity,
nationality, spreading hate and jeopardizing
socio-cultural 	and 	geopolitical 	harmony 	of
Nepal. These restrictions are so expansive that
it may be possible to prosecute many kinds of
political 	dissent. 	Given 	Nepal 	socio-political
inequalities, it may be possible for those in power
to misconstrue criticism of the state or of social
discrimination as an attack on “public harmony”
or national sovereignty.
This blanket approach to address online violence
makes dissenting and marginalized voices more
vulnerable. Even talking about issues that are
of grave concern to their own communities,
such as state violence, disenfranchisement or
social discrimination can carry the risk of legal
repercussions.
Clauses around “contempt of court” are also
debatable, 	given 	that 	individuals 	in 	Nepal’s
judiciary 	have 	been 	involved 	in 	various

-- 18 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 19
controversial cases inviting public scrutiny.
Another 	premise 	for 	restriction 	is 	content
that contradicts “public decency or morality”.
Considering 	the 	sexually 	conservative 	and
heteronormative landscape of Nepali society,
sexual 	expressions 	by 	gender 	and 	sexual
minorities and other groups may come under
further scrutiny for disturbing “public decency”.
Many of the acts also do not consider individual
consent, meaning that acts between consenting
adults may also end up being prosecuted upon
the intervention of a third party.
Activism 	surrounding 	LGBTQIA 	advocacy
which seeks to normalize non-heteronormative
expressions of intimacy online may also come
under threat under such clauses.
Arbitrary powers to authority
The 	vague 	terminologies 	used 	in 	the 	legal
articles provide space to misconstrue legitimate
expressions as attacks on national and social
unity and harmony. Interpreting what falls under
public decency and morality, or what is an attack
on national integrity ultimately falls on the state.
This runs the risk of authorities interpreting them
arbitrarily to fit their own interests.
Moreover, any legislation restricting the right
to freedom of expression must be applied by
a body which is independent of any political,
commercial, or other unwarranted influences.
It should be done in a manner that is neither
arbitrary nor discriminatory and with adequate
safeguards 	against 	abuse, 	including 	the
possibility of challenge and remedy against
25 	Sigdel, S et al. (2018). Freedom Of Expression on the Internet in Nepal. Internet Society Nepal, 2018, pp. 5.
26 	Kayastha, S. (2018, October 1) The problem with Nepal’s Porn Ban. The Record. https://www.recordnepal.
com/perspective/policing-sexuality-porn-ban-in-nepal/
potentially abusive applications. 25
States and private actors use different methods
to limit free expressions online. One route is
through using criminal laws to stifle online
expressions. 	Another 	is 	using 	tech-based
measures to prevent access to content, such
as by blocking and filtering. Nepal’s porn ban
is an example. Such curtailments are often
justified on the basis of protecting an individual’s
reputation, 	national 	security 	or 	countering
terrorism, safeguarding women and minorities
from violence, but in reality are used to censor
content that the government and other powerful
entities do not like or agree with. These measures
belie a reactive, quick-fix approach to social
issues, and often stem from a protectionist lens
and a savior complex towards the population. A
better approach to addressing sexual violence
would be to empower people and respect their
sexual agency, and punish the perpetrators of
sex crimes, rather than censoring materials on
the internet. 26
However, in many cases, states restrict, control,
censor and manipulate content disseminated via
internet without any legal basis, or on the basis
of broad and ambiguous laws, without justifying
the purpose of such actions; and/or in the manner
that is unnecessary and/or disproportionate to
achieving the intended aim. Such actions are
incompatible 	with 	states’ 	obligations 	under
international human rights law, and often create
a broader “chilling effect” on the right to freedom
of opinion and expression.

-- 19 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 20
Case study
27 	Sha, S., and Quet, M. From Expression to Expulsion: Digital Public Spaces as Theatres of Operations in Nepal.
Science, Technology and Society, 2020, pp. 386–403.
Robert Penner, a Canadian citizen working for a technology company in Nepal,
wrote frequent commentary on political issues on social media, including
issues related to rights of marginalized groups in Nepal and the discriminatory
provisions in the Nepali constitution regarding Nepali women’s right to confer
citizenship. He was detained in custody for 26 hours in 2016 after accusations
of “posting a provocative message on Twitter aimed at spreading social
discord” and was deported by department of Immigration (DOI).27 State
authorities claimed Robert Penner had been “spreading unnecessary messages
about Nepal” on social media, but did not clarify who had made the complaint.
Robert Penner’s deportation was the first such case of a foreign national
being removed from the country for posts on social media. While the stances
taken by Robert Penner were not original in themselves and merely echoed
the existing advocacy of many minority rights and women’s rights activists in
Nepal, his arrest and deportation led to a chilling effect in the wider activism
community and further emboldened conservative leaning politics in Nepal.

-- 20 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 21

-- 21 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 22
Privacy
28 	Privacy International. (2017, October 23).
What is Privacy? https://www.privacyinternational.org/explainer/56/
what-privacy
29 	A/HRC/40/63, pp. 4, adopted by consensus on 27 February 2019, 40th Session of the Human Rights
Council.
30 	Privacy International (November, 2018).
	From Oppression to Liberation: Reclaiming the Right to
Privacy. 	https://privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/2018-11/From%20oppression%20to%20liberation-
reclaiming%20the%20right%20to%20privacy.pdf
Privacy is a phenomenon which helps us manage
our 	boundaries 	while 	interacting 	with 	the
outer world and protecting us from unwanted
interference28. It is directly related to personal
autonomy of individuals and has been established
as an absolute right as per international human
rights treaties. The right to privacy is guaranteed
by Article 12 of UDHR and Article 17 of ICCPR,
which state that there shall be “no arbitrary
and unlawful interference” to anyone’s privacy
and attack upon their honor. As a signatory to
both 	these 	international 	frameworks, 	Nepal
is obligated to protect its citizens against such
interference to privacy. Infringement on privacy
directly affects personal autonomy and is linked
to other civil liberties in ICCPR including right to
self-determination (Article 1.1), right to freedom
of movement (Article 12), right to freedom of
association (Article 22), the right to freedom
of religion (Article 17), the right to freedom of
expression (Article 19) and the right to privacy
(Article 17).29 Nepal’s constitution also ensures
the right to privacy of its citizens via Article 28.
Policies around privacy tend to emphasize on the
protection of information related to private life
without considering gray area between what is
considered ‘private’ and ‘public’. This ambiguity
between what is private and what is public
depends on who the information belongs to,
their socio-political context and what impact the
violation of privacy has on them.
“When we treat the right to privacy as an absolute
or inalienable right, we sometimes end up not able
to grapple with the complexities and the ways
that concept gets appropriated or abused.” 30
We have to take this discussion beyond the public/
private dichotomy . The law has historically seen
“domestic matters” or “matters inside the home”
of individuals as private affairs, and by implication
not addressing violations within those spaces as
under the jurisdiction of the law or worthy of
taking action. In addition, women are usually
asked to stay within the “private sphere”, even
when they are homeless. Thus the laws around
privacy might not protect women from being
exploited and it becomes difficult to politicize the

-- 22 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 23
right to privacy to access justice.31
While new digital technologies have made it
more 	convenient 	to 	access 	information 	and
exercise 	self 	expression, 	these 	technologies
are also vulnerable to electronic surveillance
and interception. States around the world are
creating surveillance policies and practices that
compromise citizens’ right to privacy.32 State and
non-state actors, including business enterprises,
have been collecting an abundance of data, and
this collection is taking place without meaningful
and 	informed 	consent. 	Besides 	surveillance
systems 	actively 	compromising 	privacy 	of
individuals in real-time, even retrospective data
collection on individuals has the potential to be
harmful, especially when they lose control and
agency over information that should remain
private. 	States 	have 	also 	been 	weakening
encryption technologies and are limiting access
to anonymity tools, thus threatening the security
and confidentiality of activities online.33
The report by Special rapporteur on Right to
31 	Lever, A.(2005). Feminism, Democracy and Right to Privacy.
An Internet Journal of Philosophy Vol. 9. http://
www.minerva.mic.ul.ie/vol9/Feminism.html
32 	United Nations Human Rights Office of the high commissioner (UNHCR). (2018). Expert workshop with
the purpose of identifying and clarifying principles, standards and best practices regarding the promotion and
protection of the right to privacy in the digital age, including the responsibility of business enterprises in this
regard. {Concept Note} https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/DigitalAge/ConceptNote.pdf
33 	OHCHR. (2018).
The right to privacy in the digital age. https://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/DigitalAge/Pages/
ReportDigitalAge.aspx
privacy to the HRC mentions:
“Individuals’ experience of digital technologies
and privacy is affected by their gender, along
with factors such as ethnicity, culture, race, age,
social origin, wealth, economic self-sufficiency,
education, legal and political frameworks.”
There might be distinct concerns around privacy
in digital spaces in comparison to that of physical
spaces. 	However 	the 	conversations 	around
protecting individuals’ privacy in both of these
spaces is necessary to emphasize the value of
protecting of human dignity. A compromised
right to privacy has greater adverse effects on
women, children, LGBTIQ individuals, and other
vulnerable and marginalized communities and
this limits the benefits they can receive out of
digital technology. In addition, women, girls and
marginalized communities are constantly being
surveilled by their families, society and the state
using social norms and practices sanctioned on
them, and these extend into both the digital and
the physical world.
Legal measures and analysis
Constitution
The Constitution of Nepal 2015 guarantees the
right to privacy as a fundamental right through
article 28, which protects “the privacy of a person,
house, property, document, correspondence, or
information, of anyone”, however with exception
to where provided by law.
Along with the constitution of Nepal, there are
several legal policies in place that cover the wider
discourse on privacy and digital privacy.

-- 23 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 24
Electronic Transaction Act
(ETA) 2008
According to the Article 28 (1) and 38 (1) of the
ETA, authorities can access devices, materials
and data on citizens if they are found suspect.
Here, what is deemed suspect and what is not
depends 	on 	the 	authorities’ 	discretion. This
provision places the privacy of marginalized
communities and their rights to autonomy in a
more vulnerable position. Article 47 of the ETA
then touches on digital privacy and punishes
anyone for publishing or displaying any materials
through electronic media that may be deemed to
cross certain restrictions, such a being “contrary
to public morality and decency” or spreading
hateful content that could jeopardize “social
harmony”. Expressions of a sexual nature carried
out through electronic media, but privately and
in consent with another person, or even just
storing and recording of any content that might
be deemed ‘obscene’ still run the risk of being
criminalized through the ETA.
Criminal Code 2017
The Criminal Code 2017 has many provisions that
are related to privacy of individuals and groups.
Section 	293 	prohibits 	listening 	or 	recording
of others’ conversations unless authorized or
consented to. However any statement that is
publicly made can be recorded. Section 294
prohibits the disclosure of private information
of anyone without their permission (including
private information on public figures) unless
compelled by law. Section 298 of the Code also
restricts one from obtaining and transferring
any 	notice, 	information 	or 	correspondence
through electronic means, or breaching anyone’s
privacy, unless authorized. Given the prevalent
discriminations in the bureaucratic and legal
systems in Nepal, this law can be further used to
compromise the privacy of activists, journalists
and 	marginalized 	communities, 	and 	could
increase state surveillance on these groups.
Section 295 prohibits photographing a person
outside of a public space or disfiguring their
photographs without their consent. While this
provision can be useful in prosecuting attempts
to 	libel 	or 	harass 	using 	photos 	and 	photo
manipulation, it may also be used to restrict
artistic freedom, and especially in examples of
satire towards public figures like political leaders.
Privacy Act 2018
The Privacy Act 2018 is enacted to ensure the
right to privacy relating to body, residence,
property, 	document, 	data, 	correspondence
and character of every person, to manage the
protection and safe use of personal information
remained in any public body or institution, and
to prevent encroachment on the privacy of every
person.
However, there are a few caveats. Section 3.2
of the Act states that anyone’s privacy shall be
inviolable without the consent of the person
concerned, except for health treatment or relief
work.
After the 2020 pandemic, there were incidents
where information about COVID-19 patients and
international travelers had been shared online
under the rationale that it was an emergency
scenario. 	Individuals, 	especially 	people 	from
marginalized communities, had to face an added
layer of discrimination and stigma. For example,
Muslim communities in Janakpur were targeted
with hate speech, death threats and online abuse
because of misinformation shared online wrongly

-- 24 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 25
accusing them of being a spreader group. It is
important to maintain the privacy of individuals
and groups even during the emergency cases or
health examinations.
Similarly, section 4.2 takes the stance that private
matters between a heterosexual married couple
should be inviolable except where necessary in
the context of any legal case running between
the husband and wife. This section considers
matters between husband and wife as a “private
affair” by default, and this privileged secluding of
married heterosexual relations risk making issues
of intimate partner violence or abuse being all
the more difficult to expose and prosecute.
Section 6 of the Act is related to privacy and
explicitly 	mentions 	that 	matters 	relating 	to
reproductive health and pregnancy of every
woman shall be inviolable and shall not be given
to anyone or made public without her consent.
However, 	such 	matters 	can 	be 	discussed
between the concerned specialists during the
health treatment, and if the person is under the
age of eighteen years or of ‘unsound mind’ it can
be provided to the family or his/her guardian.
These loopholes can however, risk the agency
of 	the 	person 	concerned 	and 	create 	more
vulnerabilities.
Section 12.6 allows authorized officials to make
inquiries into issues such as age, qualification,
character, sexuality, disability of any person,
and the concerned person must oblige as per
this law. The compulsion of providing such
details whenever an authority demands (rather
than specifying what cases these details must
be furnished for) infringes on the dignity of
the person, and is also against principle of the
right to privacy. Similarly, Section 15(2) of the
Act mentions that no person shall make any
comments on the character of any other person
except as required during a legal inquiry. It
should be mentioned that the word “character”
here is vague; in a Nepali context it is often used
synonymous with “virtue” to sanction unspoken
social-cultural norms.
Section 	16.1 	prohibits 	taking 	photographs
without consent, with the intention to damage
a 	person’s 	character 	or 	prestige, 	or 	the
manipulation of photos with intent to defame,
or the publicizing of any such materials. Similarly
Section 16.3 prohibits publishing, sharing and
trading pictures taken without consent, with
the intention to annoy, distress or take any
improper 	advantage, 	or 	gain 	profit. 	These
provisions can be helpful to protect women,
children and marginalized communities against
online violence such as photo-morphing and
non-consensual sharing of intimate images and
videos. However they could also be used to
curtail press freedom and artistic expression,
protecting those in power.
Information Technology Bill
2019
The 	Information 	technology 	bill 	has 	been
drafted and is in the process of being sanctioned
to regulate and address the concerns related
to many technology related matters including
e-commerce, 	tech-innovation, 	cyber 	security
and cyber bullying. The Bill is meant to replace
the Electronic Transaction Act (ETA) of 2008.
Section 76.1 of the bill prohibits acquiring any
individual’s personal information, notice and
communication through electronic means unless
provided by law. Here the section isn’t clear if
the restriction applies to institutions and private
companies or just to the citizens. Section 76.2

-- 25 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 26
protects privacy of conversation between two
or more parties held through electronic medium
unless given the consent to record, listen or
decrypt.
The bill is silent in terms of protection of data that
already exist in public institutions or those that
would be collected. It is also silent on matters
related to data privacy when private companies
have access to the data from public institutions.
Conclusion
A recurring theme across most of the laws cited
here is that many of them have a dual framing:
the benefits of many of these laws appear to
come with strings attached. The laws uphold
privacy while potentially infringing on freedom to
express. While they have aspects that victims of
online violence can use to seek justice, additional
clauses have the potential to be misused for
restricting civil liberties. Similarly, certain laws
only provide the semblance of securing privacy,
when in reality they come with loopholes that
allow for arbitrary infringement of privacy. The
broad areas of discussion are identified below:
Sweeping powers to the government
The 	laws 	in 	this 	section 	shows 	how 	the
government 	and 	authorities 	have 	power 	to
surveil and monitor behavior of citizens and
search their devices if they are found to be
‘suspicious’. Those in power can use this law to
violate the privacy of critics and stifle dissent.
Groups such as activists and journalists could be
at further risk of surveillance.
Problems gathering evidence
The law prohibits recording of communication
which could potentially make it difficult for victims
of violence to gather evidence. Perpetrators are
unlikely to give consent to victims’ to record
communications between them. Where victims
are harassed through online communication,
this law may make it possible to criminalize the
victims themselves for recording evidence.
Consent loopholes
For minors, or for women where they may
be deemed of “unsound mind” or unable to
give consent, this law allows information on
their 	reproductive 	health 	and 	pregnancy 	to
be retrieved by their husband or family, which
may put them at risk of violence. These laws
by implication trivialize the decision making
capacity of minors or those with intellectual
disabilities with regards to their own bodies, and
can curb their right to privacy as well.
Certain laws around privacy also assume there
cannot be anything private between persons in a
heterosexual marital relationship, assuming that
family and guardians are always protective to the
girls and women in the family. Such a narrative is
flawed, as statistics routinely show that partners
and families themselves also commit many
cases of domestic violence. In Nepal’s patriarchal
context, the social institutions of marriage and
family may actually protect the abusers instead
of the victims.
It is also women’s reproductive health that is
put under scrutiny. There are no such provisions
that apply to men. Further, the law has an
ageist and ableist subtext; by not considering
the possibility of consent for certain groups, it

-- 26 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 27
fails to respect the autonomy of individuals to
understand their own bodies. Decisions for them
are made by others who are arbitrarily deemed
to have guardianship. These suggest the state
is functioning under a protectionist approach
rather than a rights-based model.
Through the use of moralized terms such as
“obscenity” or “immorality”, these laws run
the 	risk 	of 	criminalizing 	sexual 	expression,
even when the material is made through an
individual’s own consent. By not acknowledging
consent, the laws create a blanket rule that can
be misused to punish victims if their privacy
happens to be violated online and their private
expressions exposed. The laws may harm the
victim instead of punishing the perpetrator.
These circumstances could also make victims
less willing to come forward to expose their
abuser or undertake litigation.
Ambiguity
The 	laws 	routinely 	contain 	terms 	such 	as
“obscenity”, 	“vulgar”, 	“public 	morality”,
“decency”, 	“social 	harmony”, 	“integrity”,
“national 	sovereignty”, 	“public 	conduct”,
“suspicious”, 	“intention”, 	which 	are 	left
undefined within the law. This ambiguity gives
those in power ample space for interpretation
when using these laws against marginalized
people, further putting them at risk and curbing
dissent. Many of these terms are also morally
loaded and promote moral policing rather than
impartial prosecution of crime.
The term “character” mentioned in the policies
is also vague and in Nepali is generally used to
question and control the sexuality of women and
queer persons.
Case study
Case Study (002)
A sex video of victim “Di” (pseudonym) and defendant Pravin Prajapati
was leaked by the defendant without the consent of Di. The video
showed sexual activities between them that had happened at different
times. The victim claimed they had been in a relationship for a certain
period of time and that they had a sexual relationship with consent then,
but she did not know the defendant was video recording the activities.
The defendant threatened to leak the video after she decided to end the
relationship; further, the defendant even blackmailed her for money.
When the victim ignored the threat, , the defendant sent a copy of CD
with the video to the victim’s brother. The video was also leaked through
other communication mediums and shared widely.
The court sentenced the defendant to 6 months imprisonment and Rs
10,000 fine.

-- 27 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 28

-- 28 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 29
Freedom from Violence
34 	Crime Investigation Department.Women, Children and Senior Citizen Directorate. Retrieved from https://
cid.nepalpolice.gov.np/index.php/cid-wings/women-children-service-directorate
Gender based violence, including sexual and
domestic violence, is a widespread problem
in Nepal. A total of 11738 cases of domestic
violence were recorded for the fiscal year 2076/77
at 	the 	Crime 	Investigation 	Department 	of
Nepal Police. 34 These numbers only account for
recorded cases; in many instances the cases are
not registered at all. Nepal’s deep-set patriarchy
is 	evident 	in 	the 	lack 	of 	accountability 	for
perpetrators of such violence and lack of support
for victims to come forward.
An array of factors— cultural, economic and
religious, 	perpetuate 	patriarchy 	in 	Nepal.
Women’s dependence is also reinforced by the
Nepali 	state 	through 	embedded 	customary
practices within laws, in which (cis-het) men hold
the power to inherit and control most property,
take decisions for families with the concomitant
responsibility to support parents, wives and
children.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of 	Discrimination 	against 	Women 	(CEDAW)
defines violence against women as: “violence
directed against a woman because she is a woman
or which affects a woman disproportionately.
It includes physical, mental or sexual harm or
suffering, threats of such acts, coercion and other
deprivations of liberty.”
Gender based violence exists within the digital
paradigm 	as 	well, 	and 	is 	spreading 	online
alongside the expansion of the internet and
technology. The 	report 	by 	the 	UN 	Special
Rapporteur on Online Violence Against Women
and Girls to the HRC acknowledges the role of
Information 	and 	Communication Technology
(ICT) 	in 	the 	promotion 	and 	protection 	of
women’s right to live a life free of violence,
have access to information, have freedom of
expression, have the right to privacy, and so on.
However, the report also warns against potential
harms and violence against women and girls on
online platforms. This violence is gendered, and
its perpetuation of negative gender stereotypes
results in victims facing social isolation, self
limitation with regards to online presence, as
well as their families placing restrictions on their
mobility.
Online violence with its mental and psychological
harms could also bring physical and economic
harm. Online threats could become reality and
bring unwanted attention into the private and
personal lives of the victims, for example if their
intimate pictures are published on websites
without consent. There is also the prospect of job
loss due to mental trauma from online violence,
or even victims refraining from applying to

-- 29 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 30
jobs in the first place due to feelings of shame
associated with such incidents.
The Cyber Crime Unit of the Crime Division at
the Metropolitan Police of Nepal records that in
more than 90% of the registered cases of online
violence, the victims are women between the
age of 16-25. 35 The authority also stated that
only around half of the cases actually come into
contact with the unit. Furthermore, the Cyber-
crime Unit’s own stance on the matter appeared
to trivialize the harm done by online violence;
they stated that they attempted to mitigate
such cases when they received them, rather than
push for prosecution, as their aim “[was] not to
create more criminals but to minimize the crime
35 	Interview with cyber crime unit, crime division at Metropolitan Police of Nepal
36 	Body & Data. (2020).
EROTICS South Asia Regional Monitoring Survey: Nepal Country Report. (https://files.
bodyanddata.org/nextcloud/index.php/s/jsnQBzfGyDso4Kj
rates”.
In a recent quantitative study conducted by
Body & Data among 196 individuals, 86% of
the respondents have had experienced online
violence of some sort. The type of violence that
was most commonly mentioned was receiving
unwanted sexually explicit messages (52%), the
second highest experience (46%) was of abusive
comments, 45% was for name calling, 39% had
experienced hate speech on the Internet, and 36%
had experienced abuse and/or shaming a woman
for expressing views that are not normative, for
disagreeing with people and also for refusing
sexual advances, while 13% had received direct
threats of physical or sexual violence. 36
Legal Measures and analysis
Constitution
According to Article 21 of the constitution of
Nepal, victims of any crime have the right to
information on their case and the right to justice,
rehabilitation and compensation. Article 38 and
39 of the constitution criminalize any physical,
mental, sexual, psychological or any other kind
of violence against women and minors, or any
kind of oppression based on religious, social
and cultural traditions. Such an act is punishable
by law and the victims have the right to be
compensated.
As online violence can cause direct mental,
psycho-social and sexual harm and in some cases
physical harm, these laws in the constitution can
be used to establish the fact that online violence
is a type of violence.
Electronic Transaction Act
Electronic Transaction Act 	2008, 	section 	46
mentions 	that 	destroying 	or 	damaging 	any
information on any computer, causing it to
diminish in value or utility, or causing any
person to carry out such an act, with ill intent, is
punishable by law. Article 47 of the Act mentions
that 	publishing 	or 	displaying 	any 	materials
through electronic media that is contrary to
public morality, decency, or spreads hate or
jealousy, 	or 	jeopardizes 	social 	harmony 	is
punishable.
The article prohibits bullying, teasing, insults
or immoral activities against women through

-- 30 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 31
electronic media, along with publishing and
displaying material that “spreads hatred”. This
additional clause addressing violence against
women was added after the amendment to the
original text of the act in 2018, using the Act to
Amend Some Nepal Acts for Maintaining Gender
Equality.
This is the only act which explicitly describes
online violence and criminalizes it in Nepal.
However this Act does not address all forms of
online violence; it covers the issues of trolling,
bullying, 	harassment, 	and 	sharing 	private
images, but it does not address violence such as
impersonation, doxing, sextortion etc. Moreover,
it has the potential to restrict sexual expression
online.
Domestic Violence (Offense &
Punishment) Act
Domestic 	Violence 	(Offense 	& 	Punishment)
Act 2009 is the only act that has been made to
address domestic violence against individuals.
The 	preamble 	mentions 	its 	purpose 	as 	an
attempt to assure dignified and secured life of
any individual by preventing, controlling and
criminalizing domestic violence and protecting
and providing justice to the victims.
Domestic Violence 	(Crime 	and 	Punishment)
Act defines domestic violence as “any form of
physical, mental, sexual and economic harm
perpetrated by a person to a person with whom
he/she has a family relationship and this includes
any acts of reprimand or emotional harm.” This
act defines domestic violence as mental and
emotional harm as well i.e. going beyond purely
physical definitions of violence. This suggests
it can be used to prosecute online violence.
However, it should be noted that to date, no
court cases have been successfully prosecuted
under such a non-physical clause alone.
Sexual Harassment at Workplace
Act
Sexual Harassment at workplace Act 2014, 4(a)
has defined sexual violence against individuals at
a “work place” defined to include any place used
by:
(a) government entities,
(b) entities owned (fully or partly) by
government,
(c) corporate bodies or institutions established in
accordance with the prevailing laws; and
(d) any firm, institution or corporate body
registered or licensed to carry out any business,
trade, or provide services (together the
“Entities”),
in the course of conducting their business.
The Act criminalizes physical contact, showing or
displaying of pornographic material, expressing
sexual motives by way of written, verbal, or non-
verbal means, demand or proposal for sexual
favors; and flirting or harassing with sexual
motive by someone in power. It states that
using or displaying obscene or sexual contents
or expressing obscene thoughts by speaking,
writing, or through body language is a form
of violence. Hence we can understand this to
indirectly include online space and platforms.
Criminal Code
Section 122 of Criminal Code of Nepal restricts
showing 	private 	parts 	(unless 	for 	medical
treatment) or acting obscenely or talking vulgarly
in public. Showing one’s genitals to another
party without their consent is punishable and the
law is no different in addressing online or offline

-- 31 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 32
violence. However, acting “obscene” or “vulgar”
is subjective and open to interpretation; those
in power can misconstrue sexual expression
into forms of violence and make it punishable,
especially for marginalized demographics.
Section 224, Chapter on Rape defines sexual
harassment as the act of touching or trying to
touch others’ private parts without consent or
due intention of rape; undressing or trying to
undress, or directing others towards private
space, making them touch their sexual organs, or
communicating obscene issues in verbal, written
or any other form. As before, the concept of
obscene communication is subjective and could
be misused to curb one’s sexual expression.
Similarly, Section 300 of the same prohibits
threats, 	harassment, 	or 	improper 	behavior
to harm or defame others through electronic
media. Similarly, Section 305 criminalizes slander
through verbal or written form that intends to
undermine another person or their reputation.
Section 306 criminalizes defamation through
any medium, that harms the reputation of any
living or deceased person or hurts the feelings of
their family or relatives. However, exceptions are
made for any expression done with evidence, for
public good, to caution the concerned person,
to criticize those with authority, or as part of an
investigation.
Section 295 has criminalized taking or morphing
pictures without consent. However, capturing
a person’s picture while taking pictures at any
public space is allowed. However, the law here
has not defined what counts as a public place.
Individual Privacy Act
Individual 	Privacy 	Act 	2018, 	16.1 	prohibits
photography without consent done to damage
a 	person’s 	character 	or 	prestige, 	or 	photo
manipulation with intent to defame, or the
publicizing of such materials. Section 16.3 of
the act also prohibits publishing, sharing and
trading pictures taken without consent, with the
intention to annoy, distress or take any improper
advantage, or gain profit. These provisions, while
intended to safeguard from possible violence,
also has the potential to be misused to prosecute
satire or criticism (such as meme, sketches etc)
made at people in power; such expressions are
also a form of free speech from the public.
Information Technology Bill
In Section 83 of the Information Technology (IT)
Bill 2019, cyberbullying is defined as continually
harassing, teasing, demeaning, discouraging,
insulting, or scolding someone. However it is
unclear how many attempts of cyberbullying
would be regarded as “continuous” .
Section 86 of the IT bill states that production,
collection, distribution, publication, exhibition,
transmission or purchase/sale of pornographic
materials is punishable. While the law was made
under the premise of safeguarding women and
minorities from online violence, the lack of
acknowledgment regarding the consent backfire
on victims even if their materials are created and
published with consent.
Conclusion
Individuals 	and 	communities 	are 	trolled, 	harassed, threatened, ridiculed or made subject

-- 32 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 33
of hate speech based on their gender and
sexuality. 37 However, violence against women on
online platforms is not explicitly recognized in our
laws in the same way as violence against women
in offline spaces and interactions. Acts such as
the Domestic Violence Offense and Punishment
Act 	and 	Sexual 	Harassment 	Prevention 	at
Workplace Act were made to address offline
violence first and foremost. However, due to the
way these laws define violence, they it’s possible
to apply them to address online violence too. If
these laws are implemented effectively, we do
not require separate sets of laws for online and
offline violence. The ETA on the other hand,
is the only act that explicitly mentions online
violence. However, the provisions across ETA are
insufficient and do not address all forms of online
violence, and hence need to be amended.
Moreover, various loopholes and ambiguities in
the laws could punish the victims instead. The
problems present in laws can be summarized as:
Ambiguity:
Words used frequently in the laws, such as
‘obscenity’, ‘vulgarity’, ‘indecency’ or ‘improper
behavior’, are subjective and ambiguous. Given
our 	heteronormative 	patriarchal 	structures,
sexuality 	and 	sexual 	expressions 	of 	women
or queer people are regarded as deviant and
therefore more likely to have such labels applied
on them. These laws have the potential to
curb sexual expression online. Even the courts’
decisions regarding online violence are based
on patriarchal narratives that women’s sexuality
has to do something with their dignity or honor.
37 	Kee. J.S & Jaafar. J.
Narrating and challenging gender norms on social media in Asia. Oxfam. https://www.
scrible.com/view/source/AMQA041KH2440J3G3043GBR08A682K23?viewer=download
In the case studies collected (Case no. 002 and
007), where sexual content was shared online
without consent, infringing on the dignity and
right to privacy of the victim, the perpetrators
were punished by the court for attacking the
‘honor,’ ‘dignity’ and ‘reputation’ of the women,
rather than violating their privacy and right to
a dignified life as an individual granted by the
constitution 	and 	human 	rights 	frameworks.
Looking at the violation of rights of women or
marginalized communities through the lens of
morality is reductive when one is to seek justice.
There is also the question of what kind of victims
are seen as ‘dignified’ and having a ‘reputation’—
a concept that is exclusionary to begin with.
Problems in gathering evidence
and proving intent:
Certain provisions of ETA, Criminal code and IT
bill mention that the intentional action of the
perpetrator that harms the victim is a crime and
hence punishable by law. The law is unclear on
how to prove intent. The burden of proving intent
is generally placed on victims. On the other
hand, the intention of a person is hard to prove
as they can claim that the harm was unintended.
Perpetrators can go unpunished due to such
loopholes.
Missing consent
One 	of 	the 	major 	flaws 	within 	these 	laws
is the absence of consent. The law is made
with 	a 	blanket 	approach 	which 	overlooks
consent between individuals engaged in online
communication. 	Any 	sexual 	content 	shared

-- 33 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 34
between individuals, even with consent, can still
fall under this broad umbrella of obscene and
immoral activity. The law doesn’t acknowledge
the agency and autonomy of individuals over
their own bodies and instead can criminalize
their sexual expression online.
Potential backfire on victims
The prevalence of victim blaming after the
occurrence of online violence is another obstacle
to victims receiving justice.
“In most of the cybercrime cases, if the people
were in a relationship, the judge questions the girl
(victim) why she ‘betrayed’ him (perpetrator) by
leaving him and framing this as being the reason
why the perpetrator committed those crimes.” (as
stated by Government Attorney)
Victims could be further punished where laws
impose 	blanket 	rules 	regardless 	of 	consent
between individuals.
Case studies
Case 003: The victim and defendant had been casual friends. The defendant
created a fake ID online in the victim’s name and posted libelous messages
about her. The defendant also threatened to rape victim’s mother and sister
if she went to the police. The court sentenced him to a year’s imprisonment
and Rs 5000 fine. The victim was awarded compensation of Rs 75,000.
When the case wen to the Appellate court, the decision of the District Court
was upheld, with the addition that the mobile phone of the accused was
confiscated.
Case 007: The defendant and victim were husband and wife. The defendant
made a fake profile of the victim and posted libelous material. The court
found the defendant guilty as per Section 47 of the ETA and defendant was
fined Rs. 2000. The Appellate court upheld this decision of the District Court.
Case 008: The victim was sent unsolicited pictures by the perpetrator. During
the hearing of the case, neither the victim nor her lawyers could determine
or present the evidence to prove the intention of harm or the gravity of harm
caused on the victim. The perpetrator was imprisoned for 21 days. The victim
was also denied compensation on the grounds that the victim’s side did not
gather proof of harm caused to the victim.

-- 34 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 35

-- 35 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 36
Conclusion
38 	Neupane, Maniram (Government Attorney). As stated during a personal interview with Body & Data.
While Nepal has only a few provisions that
explicitly address some forms of online violence,
there are sections 	within 	various laws that
encompass 	more 	abstract 	and 	non-physical
dimensions of violence, which victims of online
violence can use to seek justice. There is scope to
address online violence within Nepal’s existing
legal framework without the need to formulate
another set of laws specifically for it. However,
there are caveats to the laws that exist: many laws
are ambiguous, or criminalize sexual expression,
or have the potential to curb free speech, all of
which warrant an amendment in the laws. The
cases we reviewed also show that these laws are
not properly implemented.
Legal interventions alone are never sufficient to
secure women’s right to live free of violence, as
evidenced by the number of daily attacks online
that women and marginalized communities face.
Legal protection that doesn’t take into account
caste, class, sexuality, gender, religion and other
factors will always fall short of delivering justice
to communities facing these intersections.
“Justice is not mathematics and one cannot write
down how much punishment and compensation
might be appropriate for a certain crime. The main
basis for the compensation is the loss suffered by
the victim but unfortunately there is no device
to measure the mental and psychological harm
suffered by the victim.”38 (Government Attorney)
Our general understanding of violence is also
centered around the physical and mental harm on
the victims; violence is less often conceptualized
as the deprivation of someone’s human rights.
In most discussions of gender based violence,
people 	tend 	to 	have 	a 	solution 	oriented
conversation and try to direct it through a legal
perspective instead of looking beyond to the
entire socio-cultural and economic inequalities
happening against women and marginalized
communities.
Laws around gender based violence are often
ambiguous and made from a protectionist lens.
Nepali society also places emphasis on ‘morality’
and ‘decency’ as the basis to criminalize any act.
The legal sanctions are focused on the act alone
and do not take into consideration consent and
boundaries within which the act taking place.
The existing laws excludes the agency and
autonomy of individuals and tries to reinforce
a monolithic idea of what it is to be a Nepali
citizen. The ambiguity in the laws also provides
asymmetrical power to decision makers in the
justice system, making rights holders further
vulnerable.
Therefore, 	the 	laws 	around 	gender 	based
violence 	need 	reform. 	Existing 	loopholes 	in

-- 36 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 37
the laws that do not serve the benefit of rights
holders and which instead could criminalize their
partaking of those rights should be amended.
The protectionist nature of laws around women
and girls also does further harm because they
assume women and girls to have no agency and
autonomy. The laws need to be inclusive of the
idea of individual’s agency and take into account
consent and boundaries.
The instruments of universal human rights may
39 	Interview note. May 2018
appear attractive in a scenario where national
laws are not ideal, but they too are themselves
not without flaws. The question remains as
to 	how 	useful 	international 	human 	rights
treaties are for women in poor countries, or
women from marginalized communities; while
the instruments apply a universalization and
simplification of gender justice narratives, they
disregard 	national 	level 	geo-politics, 	gender
politics and socio-economic and cultural realities.
Problems within the existing justice system
Legal measures remain generally interpreted
along the lines of privilege in Nepali society,
making it challenging for those without access
to have justice. Further, mediation between the
victim and perpetrator is seen as the first step
towards ‘resolving’ the problem, rather than
addressing the needs of the victim. The police
also pressurize people to negotiate and arrive at
a settlement, and generally this entails victims
being either silenced or receiving an unfair
resolution.
“We emphasized that they (the victim) should not
file the case, as the main reason of the law is not to
produce criminals but to minimize such crimes. So
we do counseling and make them (the perpetrator)
say they wouldn’t repeat the mistake again. We
focus on reconciliation.” (Representative, Cyber
Crime Unit, Teku, Kathmandu) 39
Victims are further exposed to trauma when
they go through registering their case because
there is no privacy (eg. no separate room) and
they have to share details about the incident in
front of many people. To report a cyber crime
case, the victim needs to present evidence to
the Cyber Crime Unit while filing the case, e.g.,
nude photos that are leaked, and the unit keeps
records of the evidence on computers and in
paper folders. During our interview with the
Cyber Crime Unit representative, our researcher
noticed that the folders with evidence were
kept in a drawer without a locker. On top of this,
the unit’s office room was inside a temporary
tent at the time of the interview as they didn’t
have a proper office. The tent was also a shared
working space for both the Cyber Crime Unit and
the Organized Crime Unit. Hence, there was no
guarantee of privacy for the evidence collected
from victims, and neither was the physical setup
of the department one that would reassure
victims coming in to file a case.
The statue of limitations is another barrier
preventing some victims from accessing justice.
We observed that the statue of limitations varied
from 3 months to 1 year depending on the nature
of the crime. The limitation is the same for various
offenses regardless of the victim’s background
or context. For eg. the complaint should be

-- 37 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 38
filed within 90 days for domestic violence, or
sexual harassment at the workplace, or breach
of privacy, or defamation, or slander. Advocate
Subin Mulmi, in a personal interview with Body
& Data, stated that such statute of limitations
are based on the provision and principles of
evidence law in which time limitations are fixed
so that the complaints are filed before evidences
are destroyed or damaged. However, he believes
such limitations could restrain the victims from
filing the complaint if the victims have gone
through psychological harms and are not able to
take action within the time limit.
The trauma caused by such violence is not
recognized by the law when it comes to setting
the statute of limitations. The civil code has
certain conditions where the victim is given
a chance to file the complaint after the time
limit but only in the event of natural calamities,
accident, pregnancy, etc and this doesn’t cover
many 	possible 	psychological 	conditions 	of
the victim. By implication, lawmakers are not
acknowledging such psychological trauma is
real and could hinder victim’s from acquiring
justice. Asides from logistical challenges, we
encountered justice system authorities’ own
socio-cultural biases. During interviews, various
representatives had a common refrain of how
national laws benefit women and are victimizing
men, as per their perception.
“Women have many laws protecting them, thus
male could be victim of violence.” (‘ketako peeda
dekhera afai lai maya lagcha’) (representative,
Cyber Crime Unit, Teku, Kathmandu) 40
“I always respect females and most of my
40 	Interview note. May 2018
41 	Interview note. June 2018
42 	Interview note. June 2018
colleagues are also feminists and I have also taken
CEDAW training but I think there are too many
acts protecting women. In this kind of situation
how can a man defend?” (A senior lawyer) 41
Such 	stances 	perpetuate 	gender 	binaries
and thereby limit our understanding of the
spectrum of people and their access to justice.
Furthermore, by taking the concept of legal
provisions as a zero sum game (i.e. by assuming
more legal securities for women means less for
men), these notions make it more difficult for
victims to access justice. Rampant victim blaming
and moral policing by those holding power in the
justice system prevents victims from making full
use of the legal provisions available to them.
“Most people in the justice system are sensitive, but
due to lack of proper acts and with discretionary
power to the judge, the justice system is weak.”
(Government Attorney) 42
“Most of the cases (of online violence) are of the
former partners who share their (intimate) videos,
photos and later when they are separated then
those photos or videos are misused. …. Why do
people need to make such videos? These factors
may affect the decision of the court, and the
judge will assume that when a girl herself sends
her naked pictures then she must have consent.”
(Government Attorney)
The idea of the ‘genuine victim’ also presents
a hurdle; if the victim does not fit into the
stereotypical notions of who is an innocent
victim, then it becomes difficult for them to
receive protection from the law.
“Mostly people sympathize with the innocent

-- 38 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 39
women from rural areas. But still people will judge
the character of the girl (victim) insensitively.
Cases are not always decided according to the
43 	Interview note. June 2018
gravity of the case but according to the position
of the victim.” (Government Attorney) 43
Analysis of reviewed cases
Upon analyzing the cases gathered from the
cyber bureau and relevant courts, we can see
that a high number of victims are women,
and victimized mostly by men who are either
current 	or 	were 	previous 	intimate 	partners,
friends, 	colleagues, 	an 	acquaintance, 	or
strangers who were encountered through social
networkings. The online violence took the form
of non-consensual sharing of images or videos,
cyber 	stalking, 	identity 	theft, 	doxing, 	and
blackmailing, among others. The perpetrators
generally attacked the bodily autonomy and
dignity of the victims/survivors and violated their
privacy. General Nepali society ties the concept
of women’s shame and dignity to their sexuality
and hence perpetrators, usually men, attacked
women’s sexuality as an easy target.
The authorities within the legal system are
guided by patriarchal values, and the system
is not friendly to victims who are often women
or 	gender 	non-conforming. 	Perpetrators 	are
motivated to keep attacking the sexuality of
vulnerable groups as they know the system is
unlikely to hold them accountable. The decisions
of courts on these cases also tells us a lot about
the nature of our justice system. One of the
loopholes we analyzed is the burden of proving
intent or gathering evidence being placed on
the victim; this is not a victim-friendly approach
and rather supports the status quo of powerful
perpetrators. Meanwhile, even when decisions
are made in favor of women victims, emphasis
is placed on the ‘honor’ of the women, instead
of the fact that such actions are a violation of
their right to privacy, bodily autonomy and right
to dignified life. Technical incompetence was
also apparent on the part of the authorities, for
example in cases where they were confiscating
computers 	instead 	of 	other 	devices 	of 	the
perpetrators, whereas the harassment had been
done through mobile phones.
Litigation 	for 	online 	violence 	resulting 	in
compensation for the victims is rare, and the
punishment for perpetrators is also very low
compared to other forms of violence. The ETA
which directly addresses online violence, was
brought up almost two decades ago and this
could be why the amount of compensation it sets
doesn’t seem comparable to today’s standards.
Of course, greater punishment doesn’t entail less
crime and more compensation will not lessen
the harm caused, however, the law’s mismatch
in keeping with current times needs to be taken
into account.
It is also important to consider that the provisions
and punishments for the same crime on different
platforms i.e. online vs offline are different.
The online related offenses actually have more
punishment and compensation upto 1 lakh and
5 years of imprisonment. While for offline ones,
it is only upto 10 thousands and one year of
imprisonment. There is no clarity as to why this

-- 39 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 40
asymmetry exists. Given the greater outreach of
online expression, one implication is that such
stringency for online cases reflects intent to curb
freedom of expression, as opposed to it being a
concerted effort to address online violence.44 The
proposed IT bill has similar kinds of provisions
for online crimes, which are already addressed in
other laws governed for offline spaces, such as
Criminal Code.
Rather than seeking new laws for the new
paradigm of tech, the reality is that existing
laws that address non-physical violence can be
reformed and better implemented to address the
issue of online violence. But it is evident that socio-
cultural values steeped in patriarchy influence
44 	Body & Data. (2020).
Unshackling Expression: A study on criminalization of Expression Online in
Nepal. 	Association 	of 	Progressive 	Communication. 	https://news.cyrilla.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/
UnshacklingExpressioNepal.pdf
both the making and the implementation of the
legal system surrounding online violence. And
the brunt of it is borne by women and minority
groups. This violence is further facilitated by
loopholes and incompetence within our justice
system. There are provisions which victims can
use to seek justice, but the framing of legal
policies are such that they place civil society in
a catch-22 situation: the same laws that may
aid 	victims 	also 	contain 	enough 	ambiguity
to be misused to suppress dissent. Overall,
online violence continues to harms women and
minorities in Nepal across multiple dimensions
of physical, social, economic and mental well
being.

-- 40 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 41
Recommendations
1. 	Our policy mapping and analysis shows that there are already existing legal
frameworks in Nepal that can be used to seek legal remedies when faced with non-
physical violence, including online violence. However the laws need to be amended to
more explicitly recognize online violence as violence.
2. 	Online violence should be recognized by not just our legal system but also our
socio-cultural system. Laws around online violence should secure people’s rights to
expression, rights to privacy and right to be safe from violence online.
3. 	The laws addressing freedom of expression and privacy such as ETA and IT bill must
be amended in order to remove the broad and vague restrictions on freedom of
expression online.
4. 	The authorities within the legal system, including the police and court, needs to
be sensitized to address issues of mental harm on victims, such as through police
arbitrarily facilitating “negotiations” between the victim and the perpetrator, or
through moral policing and victim blaming.
5. 	Provisions outlawing consent on basis of being contrary to public morality, obscenity,
spreading hate or jealousy or damaging the harmonious relations between groups
must be amended to encompass a human rights approach and with consideration
of historically oppressed groups: women, queer, marginalized and underprivileged
communities.
6. 	To tackle gender based violence and online violence, resources and funds must be
allocated towards women’s economic empowerment and education, and not just
in legal interventions and strengthening state law enforcement agencies like police
and courts. Legal activism and legal literacy is important, but these are incomplete
without interventions in the socio-economic and cultural areas.
7. 	Development and provision of immediate support mechanisms by state and non-
state actors to support victims of online violence, including provision of shelter for
physical safety, legal counseling, and digital safety and security.

-- 41 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 42
Annex
Data analysis of cases collected
Case no
 	Location and
relationship
between victim
and perpetrator
Brief description of crime/accusation; evidence
collected (where available)
Court’s decision and punishment (in the event of guilty
verdict)
(DC= District Court; AC= Appelate Court)
001
 	Kathmandu;
colleagues
Obscene messages and photos sent through
email.
002
 	Bhaktapur;
former couple
Recording sex tape without consent and leaking
of the sex tape, attempt at blackmailing.
Computer CPU, mobile phone and CDs were
confiscated.
Defendant proven to have committed the crime. Court
deems that “serious harm caused to the girl’s honor, dignity,
reputation due publication of illegal materials in electronic
form”. Punishment of 6 month imprisonment and fine of Rs.
10,000.
003
 	Kathmandu;
casual friends
Creating fake ID online and posting material
slandering the victim, online threats of rape
against victim’s sister and mother as well.
The mobile and sim card which he had used to
send the threats were confiscated by police.
DC: It was proven that the defendant had committed the
crime, hence he is liable for Rs 5000 fine and imprisonment
of one year.
As the defendant had caused grievous harm on victim’s life
and reputation, victim is rewarded with the compensation of
Rs. 75,000 from the accused.
AC: The lower court had not confiscated the mobile phone of
accused, the AC decides to confiscate the mobile phone of
accused, while other decisions remain the same.
004
 	Kathmandu;
college friends
Doxing, cyber stalking; victim’s personal contact
number and name attached with some obscene
messages were posted on adult websites.
Defendant’s mobile, tablet and computer CPU
were taken as evidence.
DC: on the basis of the confessional statement stating that
he had sent those obscene messages and pictures to the
victim, the court imposed fine of Rs. 5000 on the accused.
The court did not order compensation for the victim.
AC: The appellate court held that it was not necessary to
confiscate computers or tablet of the defendant as the
criminal activity had been done using the defendant’s
mobile phone (which was already confiscated). Citing that
the compensation amount had not been mentioned by the
victim on any of the documents, the court did not provide
any compensation to the victim.
005
 	Kathmandu;
mentioned as
husband and
wife (but sans
proof, and not
mentioned by
victim in FIR)
Victim’s Facebook ID had been hacked by the
defendant, and through it the defendant sent
obscene messages to other men. Defendant also
sent obscene messages and calls to the victim.
Defendant’s mobile and sim card were
confiscated.
DC: The district court held defendant liable for committing
the crime and punished him with 15 days imprisonment, and
fine of Rs. 5000.
AC: Citing that the plaintiff had not mentioned a
compensation amount, the court held that it could not order
compensation for the victim.
006
 	Kathmandu;
acquaintances
Defendant created a fake ID in the victim’s name
and posted images of her and other women
through it without her consent.
Mobile phone and sim card of the defendant were
taken.
DC: As the involvement of defendant is clearly seen in this
case from the presented evidences, the defendant is liable to
fine of RS. 3000 as per section 47(1) of Electronic Transaction
Act, 2063.
AC: Appellate court also upheld the decision of the district
court. It didn’t provide victim any compensation on the
ground that the fixed claim amount equivalent to the harm
suffered by the victim has not been disclosed in any papers
or documents or the testimonial presented by the victim.

-- 42 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 43
007
 	Nawalparasi;
married couple
The defendant made a fake ID in the victim’s
name and posted libelous material through it.
Mobile phone, laptop and sim card of the
defendant were confiscated.
DC: Defendant was held liable to a fine of Rs. 2000 as per the
section 47 of ETA.
AC: The court upheld the guilty verdict of the lower court and
held the defendant liable for a fine of Rs. 2000.
008
 	Kathmandu;
acquaintances
Online harassment through SMS.
Mobile, sim card, call details and sms history were
taken as evidence.
DC: Defendant given 21 days imprisonment. No
compensation given to victim on account of neither victim
nor lawyers determining compensation amount for harm
caused to the victim.
AC: Both decisions of the lower court upheld by the
Appellate court.
009
 	Kathmandu;
live-in
relationship of 8
years
Harassment through obscene messages and
death threats, through SMS
Mobile, sim card, call details and sms history were
taken as evidence
DC: The court upheld that the claims of harassment did not
match with call records and message record details provided
by the Nepal Telecom office, hence authenticity of the
messages was not proven. According to the court, plaintiff
has the burden of proof to prove that the message was sent
from the accused’s mobile number. The plaintiff also filed the
case a year after the incident occured, so it had crossed the
statute of limitations. As a result, defendant was not held
liable for any crime mentioned in charge sheet, and hence
acquitted.
AC: Upheld the decision of district court.
010
 	Kathmandu;
married couple
Doxing, identity theft, fake Facebook ID, posted
obscene photos and messages, non-consensual
taping of sex videos, extortion.
As per plaintiff, the defendant (her husband)
was abusive, and therefore she returned to her
parents’ house and filed a divorce case against
him. During this period, the defendant made a
fake Facebook ID in her name, and posted her
photos as well as libelous material. The defendant
also approached others for sex under her assumed
profile, and told people that the plaintiff was a
sex worker. Plaintiff has also claimed that the
defendant extorted women by making sex videos
with them and later blackmailing them.
011
 	Kathmandu;
defendant was
construction
worker at
plaintiff’s house
Creating fake ID and posting victim’s picture
without consent, sextortion, blackmail
As per the plaintiff, defendant made a Facebook
account in the victim’s name and posted pictures
of the two of them kissing. He also sent obscene
videos, which he had made without her consent
when they were in relationship. Her relatives
informed her about this matter. The defendant
also started extorting her by threatening to post
her photos and videos on YouTube if she did not
have a physical relationship with him, and due to
this, the victim obliged under duress.
012
 	Chitwan and
Pokhara;
plaintiff is
mother-in-law
of defendant
Online harassment through photo manipulation,
impersonation, doxxing.
The defendant made a fake Facebook profile and
posted photoshopped images where the plaintiff
and plaintiff’s family members’ faces were put on
nude imagery. The defendant also posted libelous
content pretending to the be plaintiff, posting her
phone number and inviting others to have sex.

-- 43 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 44
013
 	Kathmandu;
unknown
(stranger)
Blackmail, obscene photos and messages, photo
shopped images, Doxing
Plaintiff filed an application requesting to arrest
and punish an unknown person who had tried
to blackmail her for money by threatening to
post compromising pictures. Plaintiff later found
out that images of her and her friends were
Photoshopped onto nude imagery, and through a
fake Facebook profile, the person asked them for
recharge card.
014
 	Kathmandu;
defendant
was ex-wife
of plaintiff’s
husband
Sexual harassment and defamation.
The plaintiff filed a case of cyber-crime against
the defendant, for having caused her distress
and harmed her security by posting libelous
accusations on the plaintuff through her
(defendant’s) Facebook profile. The defendant
also posted photos of the plaintiff, without
consent.
015
 	Siraha; ex-
couples (as
claimed by
defendant)
Defamation, leakage of photos without consent.
Plaintiff and defendant were connected on
Facebook. As per the plaintiff, defendant sent
her a friend request from a fake profile using her
photo. Defendant also caused her mental distress
through messages and online defamation.
Law Analysis
Domestic Violence (Crime and Punishment) Act, 2066 (2009)
Enforcing Agency: Nepal Women Commission, Police Office, Local body
Action: Police or local body shall produce the perpetrator within 24 hours of the
complaint, excluding the time of travel and make arrest if he/she refuses to appear for
the statement. However, “the complaint, for an offence committed pursuant to this Act,
shall be filed within ninety days of the commission of the crime.”

-- 44 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 45
Article/ Clause 	Language 	Analysis
2 (a) Definition 	“Domestic Violence” means any form of physical,
mental, sexual and economic harm perpetrated by
person to a person with whom he/she has a family
relationship and this word also includes any acts of
reprimand or emotional harm.
This also specifically mentions mental, sexual and emotional
harm caused. In case of online violence if caused by
someone within family ties, this clause can be used.
2 (d) Definition 	“Mental harm” means any act of threatening the victim
with physical torture, intimidation, reprimanding him/
her , accusing him/her of false blame, forcefully evicting
him/her from the house or otherwise causing injury
or harm to the victim emotionally. This expression
also includes any discrimination carried out on the
basis of prejudice, religion or culture and customs and
traditions.
Relevant to cases related to extortion, blackmailing, undue
manipulation of someone online.
2 (c) Definition 	“Sexual harm” means sexual behavior, humiliation,
discouragement or harm in self respect of any person;
or any other act that hampers safe sexual health.
Many cases of online violence involve harm to self- respect
of the victim.
4 (9) Filing of
Complaint
The assistance of a psychologist, sociologist, social
activist and a family member trusted by the victim and
any other witness as per necessity and availability may
be taken while conducting reconciliation pursuant to
sub-section (8). In the course of such reconciliation
psychological of and social effects on the victim, as
well as his/her right to privacy shall be taken into
consideration.
This is after the police or local body produces the perpetrator
and finds reason to believe that an act of domestic violence
has been committed. Giving power to the system to decide
whether or not the act is violence.
4 (11) 	If the perpetrator fails to appear pursuant to Sub-
sections (4) and (5); or he/she cannot be made present;
or the parties fail to settle their dispute through
reconciliation, the police officer and local body, with the
consent of the complainant shall, within fifteen days
after the expiry of thirty days as per Sub-section (8)
shall forward to the court, the complaint mentioning all
details, along with evidence and other legal documents
incidental thereto.
The stress in ‘parties trying to settle their dispute through
reconciliation’ again is a pushback on access to justice,
giving power to local authorities to mitigate the case before
it reaches the court. Given the social positioning and lower
bargaining power of women and queer persons in our
society, many are pressured to compromised for monetary
or other benefit, and futher, there have been instances of
intimidation and forceful mitigation.
The Sexual Harassment at Workplace Prevention Act, 2015 (2071)
Action: The Sexual Harassment Prevention Act envisages two internal and external
complaint mechanisms. Under the internal complaint handling mechanism, it would be
the employer, manager, HR department, and the external complaint handling handling
mechanism is the Chief District Offier (CDO) of the district
Complaint to be filed within 15 days against the perpetrator in front of the management
Article/ Clause 	Language 	Analysis
4. Sexual
harassment is
considered to be
taken place
Any of the following unsolicited acts committed by,
or caused to be committed by, any person in abuse
of his/her position, power or by imposition of any
type of coercion, undue influence, or enticement
would constitute sexual harassment:
(a) Physical contact and advances;
(b) Showing or displaying of pornographic material,
(c) Expressing sexual motives by way of written,
verbal, or non-verbal means,(d) Demand or proposal
for sexual favours; and (e)Flirting or harassing with
sexual motive.

-- 45 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 46
6 Complaint
mechanism
Under the internal complaint handling mechanism,
the employer / manger has the power to do any
of the following in the course of handling of any
complaint of occurrence of sexual harassment:
(a) Reconciliation between the victim and the
accused with mutual consent of the parties;
(b) Require the perpetrator to apologize to the
victim;
(c) Warn the perpetrator not to repeat the act
(d) Arrange for reasonable compensation from the
perpetrator to the victim; and
(d) Take departmental action against the perpetrator
pursuant to the internal employee service rules.
In the context of internal complaint handling mechanism,
the Act does not specifically require the employer to
constitute a complaint handling committee within the
entity, with the specific responsibility to handle the
complaints. Formation of such committee would be
important to ensure the streamlining of complaint handling
process, quick handling of complaints, as also give clarity to
victims as to who they should approach.
Again ‘reconciliation between the parties’ is prioritised. In
this case it is done by the internal mechanism. Given work
place harassment takes place on someone with less power
and privilege compared to the perpetrator, the victim’s
negotiating power is less. Action according to the internal
employee service rule comes only at the end.
Electronic Transaction Act, 2063 (2007)
Enforcing Agency: Nepal Women Commission, Police Office, Local body
Action: Police shall or Local body shall produce the perpetrator within 24 hours of the
complaint, excluding the time of travel and make arrest if he/she refuses to appear for
the statement. However, “the complaint, for an offence committed pursuant to this Act,
shall be filed within Ninety days of the commission of the crime.”
Article/ Clause 	Language 	Analysis
47 	If any person publishes or displays any materials
in the electronic media including computer or
internet which are prohibited from publicatoin
or display by prevailing law or which may
be contrary to the public morality or decent
behaviour, or any type of material which may
spread hate or jealousy against anyone or
which may jeopardise the harmonious relations
subsisting among the peoples of various castes,
tribes and communities, or if anyone bullies,
teases, insults or does any immoral activities
against women the she/he shall be liable to
the punishment with fine upto one hundred
thousand or with imprisonment up to 5 years, or
both.

-- 46 of 48 --

Body & Data is a digital rights organization in Nepal
that aims to increase women and queer persons’
engagement in digital spaces through suitable
strategies for expression, autonomy and agency.
Ambiguity
Freedom of Expression
Consent loopholes
Exterior text...
Consent missing
Paradoxical
framing
Proving Intent
Sweeping powers
for the government
Potential backfire on victims
Problems gathering
evidence
Mapping laws relevant to online violence
in Nepal
Consent between and of the individual(s)
involved are not regarded in framing of the
law and its implementation. It implies (all)
sexual content to be ‘obscene’ and does
not respect the agency of an individual
over their own bodies and criminalises
sexual expression.
Many of these laws have a dual framing: the benefits appear
to come with strings attached. While they have aspects that
victims of online violence can use to seek justice, additional
clauses have the potential to be misused for restricting civil
liberties. This is a recurring theme across most of the laws
cited here.
The laws contain terms such as these, which are
then left undefined. This ambiguity gives those in
power ample space for interpretation when using
these laws against the marginalised, further
putting them at risk and curbing dissent. Many of
these are also morally loaded terms that promote
moral policing rather than unbiased prosecution of
crime.
Right to freedom of expression is curtailed in the
name of national security and social harmony.
Political satire and voices that oppose power
could be restricted. This poses a risk for activism.
Sexual expression is also curbed under the
premise of public morality or decency. Asides from
direct curbing of rights, loopholes in privacy mean
that citizens feel greater surveillance from the
state, and thus are not able to express their
opinion freely.
Perpetrators are unlikely to give consent to
victims to record communications between
them. Where victims are harassed through
online communication, this law may make it
possible to criminalize the victims
themselves for recording evidence.
The term “character" is a vague and loaded term
often used to control and question the sexuality of
women and queer persons. This law also provides
information pertaining to reproductive health and
pregnancy to their husband and family, which can
further put them at risk of violence. The law is
ageist and abelist and does not respect autonomy
of individuals to understand their bodies.
...elaborates pitfalls in the laws.
How to read this chart:
The law doesn’t mention due process such as
court order or legal aid for person being searched.
Who is suspected (as grounds for a search) is left
to the discretion of the Controller. Those in power
can use this law to violate privacy of critics and
stifle dissent.
Many of the laws criminalize sexual expression, labelling
it obscene or immoral even if created through the
individual’s choice. By not acknowledging consent, the
laws create a blanket rule that can be misused to punish
victims if their privacy is violated online and their private
expressions exposed. The laws may harm the victim
instead of punishing the perpetrator.
While the IT Bill is a proposed
document, we have included it
here because of its importance
in public discussion on legal
measures for online violence.
The Criminal Code and the IT Bill have articles
that hinge criminality on the intent of the
perpetrator. This provides a loophole for
perpetrators to get away by claiming the harm
caused was not their intent. Burden of proof is
also generally placed on victims. The law is
unclear on how to prove intent. It allows
authorities to decide the purpose of certain
actions, leaving space for abuse of power.
This is a policy mapping and review of laws that
are relevant to online violence within the scope of
digital rights in Nepal, with a focus on gender and
sexuality. Three human rights lenses—Right to
Privacy, Freedom of Expression and Freedom from
Violence—are used to analyze relevant laws. This
document is meant to be a condensed guide for
victims, legal practitioners and activists.
Timeline
Constitution of Nepal 2015
Sexual Violence at Workplace Prevention Act 2015
Electronic Transaction Act 2008
Act Against Domestic Violence 2009
Criminal Code, 2017 	Privacy Act 2018
IT Bill 2019
2010 	2015	2005 	2020
“obscenity”
“vulgar” 	“public morality”
“decency”
“social harmony”
“national sovereignity”	“integrity”
“public conduct”
Freedom of
expression
Privacy
Freedom
from
Violence
Find the full report on our website: https://bodyanddata.org/
Constitution 2015 	Electronic
Transaction Act 2008
IT Bill 2019 	Privacy Act 2018	Criminal Code 2017
Act Against
Domestic
Violence, 2009
Sexual harassment
at workplace
prevention act,
2015
Publishing or displaying of
any materials in electronic
media contrary to public
morality, decent behaviour,
to spread hate or jealousy, to
jeopardise social harmony is
punishable.
No publication and broadcasting or printing of
any news items, articles, editorials or other
reading materials or audio visual materials shall
be subjected to censorship.
But restrictions put on expressions undermining
national integrity and social harmony.
The privacy of a person, house, property,
document, correspondence, information, or
material regarding their character is inviolable
except as provided by law.
Noone will be forced to disclose anything that
is legally mandated to be private
(people can inquire regarding their own
personal details or anything of public interest).
Criminalization of violence against
women and provision of compensation.
Criminalization of violence against
minors and provision of compensation.
Victims of any crime to have right to
information on their case, and the right to
justice, rehabilitation and compensation.
Publishing or displaying of any materials
in electronic media contrary to public
morality is punishable.
Authority can access our devices,
materials and data if found suspect.
Authority can access our private key if
found threatening the sovereignty or
integrity of the country, to maintain law
and to maintain friendly relations with
friendly countries.
Criminalizes destruction,
damage, deletion, alteration or
disruption of information on
any computer source, or
intentionally causing any
person to carry out such an act.
Publishing or displaying of any
materials in electronic media
contrary to public morality,
decent behaviour, to spread hate
or jealousy, to jeopardise social
harmony is punishable.
Restriction of electronic media
usage that attacks national
sovereignty, integrity, nationality
and brings hatred, mistrust among
communities.
Restriction of electronic media usage
that incites discrimination or is
against public conduct or morality.
Cyber bullying is defined as
continually harassing,
teasing, demeaning,
discouraging, insulting or
scolding someone.
Production, collection,
distribution, publication,
exhibition, transmission or
purchase/sale of pornographic
materials is punishable.
No one shall use electronic medium
or establish online relation with an
intention of sexually exploitating or
carrying out illegal activities.
Restriction in acquiring
individual's data unless
provided by law.
Privacy of conversation
between two or more parties
held through electronic
medium assured unless
consent given to record, listen
or (de)encrypt.
Anyone's privacy shall be
inviolable without the consent of
the person concerned, except for
health treatment or relief work.
Where applicable, arrows connect
specific laws and sections to the
pitfalls identified in them.
Each solid box
represents a
bill or law.
Inside each box
are summarized
versions of
relevant sections.
Yellow highlights identify ambiguous words.
Light blue identifies mentions of intent.
Privacy between husband and
wife inviolable except where
necessary if case ongoing
between husband and wife.
Authorized official may make
inquiries into issues such as age,
qualification, character, sexuality,
disability of any person;
concerned person must oblige.
Prohibits photography without
consent done to damage
person’s character or prestige, or
photo manipulation with intent
to defame, or the publicizing of
such materials.
Prohibits publishing, sharing
and trading pictures taken
without consent, with the
intention to annoy, distress or
take any improper advantage,
or gain profit.
Information related to
reproductive health and
pregnancy of every woman shall
be inviolable, except for
underage person and those of
"unsound" mind.
No person shall make any
comments on the character of
any person except when law is
required to inquire.
Production, sale, publication,
promotion (through electronic
medium), purchase, rent,
display or keeping of obscene
books and brochures
promoting immorality,
eroticism is prohibited.
Restriction in showing private
parts or acting 'obscenely' or
talking 'vulgar' in public.
Obtaining and transferring
any notice, information or
correspondence restricted
unless authorized.
Prohibits photographing or
disfiguring photographs of a
person outside of a public
space without their
consent.
Prohibits disclosing private
information without
permission, including private
information on public figures
unless compelled by law.
Prohibits disclosing private
information without permission,
including private information on
public figures unless compelled
by law.
Criminalizes defamation through
any medium, that harms reputation
of living or deceased person or hurts
feelings of their family/relatives.
However, exceptions are made for
any expression done with evidence,
for public good, to caution
concerned person, to criticize those
with authority, or as part of
investigation.
Criminalizes defamation through
any medium, that harms
reputation of living or deceased
person or hurts feelings of their
family/relatives. However,
exceptions are made for any
expression done with evidence,
for public good, to caution
concerned person, to criticize
those with authority, or as part of
investigation.
Prohibits listening or
recording of others’
conversation without the
permission of the competent
authority or consent of
involved persons, unless for
any statement that is publicly
made.
Prohibits listening or recording
of other's conversation without
the permission of the
competent authority or
consent of involved persons,
unless for any statement that
is publicly made.
Restriction in showing private
parts or acting 'obscenely' or
talking 'vulgar' in public.
Prohibits threats, harassment,
improper behavior to harm or
defame others through
electronic media.
Criminalizes slander through
verbal or written form that
intends to undermine another
person or their reputation.
Sexual harassment is touching or
trying to touch others’ private
parts without consent or due
intention of rape, or directing
another person towards private
space, making them touch their
sexual organs, communicating
obscene matters verbally,
written or any other form.
Taking or morphing pictures
without consent criminalized. 	"Domestic violence" is
physical, mental, sexual and
economic harm perpetrated
by a person on another with
whom he/she has a family
relationship.
Social network sites will be
non-functional/banned in Nepal
if they are not registered at
Department of Information
Technology.
Arbitrary removal of content on
social sites by Department of
Information and Technology on
the basis of vague limitations and
expansive terms such as
"offensive content".
Using or displaying obscene or
sexual content or expressing
obscene thoughts by speaking,
writing or through body
language is form of violence.
Article 28
Section 47
Section 121
Section 122
Section 294
Section 295
Section 294
Section 122
Section 300
Section 305
Section 306
Section 306
Section 224
Section 295
Section 298
Section 293
Section 293
Section 28.1
Section 76.1
Section 88.1
Section 88.2
Section 83
Cyber bullying is defined as
continually harassing, teasing,
demeaning, discouraging,
insulting or scolding someone.
Section 83
Section 86
Production, collection,
distribution, publication,
exhibition, transmission or
purchase/sale of pornographic
materials is punishable.
Section 86
Section 87
Section 15.2
No person shall make any
comments on the character of
any person except when law is
required to inquire.
Section 15.2
Section 3.2	Section 4.2
Section 12.6
Section 16.1
Prohibits photography without
consent done to damage
person’s character or prestige,
or photo manipulation with
intent to defame, or the
publicizing of such materials.
Section 16.1
Section 16.3
Prohibits publishing, sharing and
trading pictures taken without
consent, with the intention to
annoy, distress or take any
improper advantage, or gain
profit.
Section 16.3
Section 6
Section 76.2
Section 4.b
Section 38.1
Section 47
Section 47
Article 27
Article 19	Article 17
Article 38
Article 39
Article 21
Section 46
Section 91
Section 92

-- 47 of 48 --

Mapping Laws | Page 48
Body & Data is a digital rights organization in Nepal that
aims to increase women and queer persons’ engagement in
digital spaces through suitable strategies for
expression, autonomy and agency.
bodyanddata.org
Mapping Laws Relevant to Online Violence in Nepal

-- 48 of 48 --

